to keep it in a nut shell I had to go on that treatment for about like talking one pill a day until like for two, for two and a half years. And then I stopped taking it, the psychiatrist said you’re fine now you can, you can find it, you’ll be okay as long as you don’t take drugs or whatever and I’d almost lied to him like saying like no I haven’t I like I tried it the other day or whatever there wasn’t any, I wasn’t helping myself by saying to the  Centre like no I’m doing this I’ve got a problem, I can’t actually start like getting out of this mindset of like being so complacent about drugs but I knew I was being like sort of cheating myself almost and gambling with my own right mind. It was very frustrating to see like I’m not sure what would be the case because now I have to take it (medication) for another two years from now. Because I started going back, I started doing counselling yes for like a little bit with a psychologist and she was helping me with like sort of confidence techniques and yes just like sort of ways, ways to deal with paranoia like dealing with your own mind like installing confidence in me and I ended up with, it doesn’t work for everyone and it sometimes it doesn’t like sound very appealing and some of my friends I would like say to them like about it and some were really interested and think oh I could definitely benefit from that and others are like really I don’t know, I can deal with my own problems sort of thing and some people, it’s either one way or the other you’re either open minded to it or really not. But with me I was much more accepting of it and really did help and I managed to sort of deal with it like to a certain extent and then it came to the stage were I couldn’t actually like deal with it anymore just on my own. I had to go back on medication, I had to go to my psychiatrist and say Look I’ve tried and although I’ve stopped taking drugs and I won’t ever do it again it’s coming to the stage now where I don’t, I don’t want to risk trying to be like risking my pride whereas I could go on like sort of keeping like no I can deal with this on my own and I’ve actually know you’re going to need actual medication I don’t want to risk you going even more delving into that mindset. And it’s taken me a very long time like to feel normal again

But it was something a lot more serious than that and as, and as time, though they sort of they referred me to like my local GP and then they were really supportive of me actually like they understood that something serious, there was something seriously wrong with me and then I went to see a psychiatrist and he like diagnosed me with psychosis after a few visits. And but at that point he prescribed me a few pills to take like every day like a few different ones, one was for like the anxiety and like collecting my thoughts and sort of almost like rebuilding your mind just like sort of taking things to sort of like getting more on a level and getting rid of all the paranoia and stuff like that but it took like a month to kick in. So it was like another month and I was feeling these thoughts and I had to start Art School then and had to go into hall and it was like literally, I remember like my parents and my aunty dropped me off at hall and feeling literally the worst I’ve ever felt in my life just like, my mind was racing constantly. Because at this point like I’d been like I say like with that feeling of like paranoia and helplessness and it had been going on for months and I after a while you just can’t, you can’t rationalise, you don’t know what’s sort of real, what’s not and your minds just slowly going crazy just a bit. Just like going literally losing the plot it’s all I can describe it as just the ultimate paranoia like there’s so much paranoid I could feel and I never want to feel like that again. but he gave me some pills that are like some, what’s that sort of sedative pills that if I was feeling really anxious and because I had to go through this year and I had to like I was sort of thrown in at the deep end like having started like a new, a new group of friends, not I still have all my friends from my school and all the friends that I’d made up until that age, I was still really close to them they were really, really supportive of me, you know, they were going out sort of partying and still doing drugs and obviously it was strangely still quite tempting though to still take drugs at that, at that point in time.

I think everybody has got a kind of. Talking to doctors about drugs or heavy alcohol use is essentially a taboo, you kind of limit what you say. You kind of halve it. I think they appreciated my honesty and I think they actually liked that, you know, somebody they could work with to get over the problems that the DKA so they could know how to treat me. So of course if I hadn’t have told them that I didn’t have alcohol or drugs in my system and they’d put me on a different drug it could have gone horribly wrong. So it’s always best to be honest.

I just wanted help. I just wanted help and they were trying to feed me fucking tablets again which turned me into a goldfish the last time, you know what I mean. And I was, I was drinking a lot of vodka. I was drinking so much that sometimes I was pissing constantly. I couldn’t, sorry this is a bit horrible, but I was drinking so much that it felt like I was constantly dripping. And I think that’s a sign, I’m not 100% I think that’s a sign of like bladder problems, kidney problem. I was just drinking. I was getting pains in my kidneys. I’d drink a bottle a day easy, just neck it down like, you know. I was under. I remember waking up, this is not long after I started again with the psychiatrist, I remember waking up outside a flower shop with a metal basket that I’d stolen from a supermarket. I’d put the metal basket through a car window and I’d ran outside this flower shop and apparently I was head butting it. But I can’t remember any of that. I just remember waking up and this woman screaming at me. So basically what I thought was that the only person that was going to help me is me and I. That is how I started then to try to control myself and try to cut down on what I was doing. Sometimes it worked, sometimes it didn’t. But the fact is the doctors tried to give me tablets and that wasn’t going to help me. Help, the main thing was I sort of picked out a few things that they were saying. I sort of, self medication has always been a thing with me and they made that, they made me aware that I was smoking weed to keep myself, try and make myself happy but in fact that wasn’t helping. So, you know, what I should have been doing is take an anti-depressant instead of the weed and that, you know. But I’d been basically medicating myself so when I felt down I’d do uppers or if I was up I’d do downers. So that started to become apparent. The way I need to do it is I need to take it all out of the equation. I don’t need to balance myself. I need to just go neutral and then I won’t be in this situation. And it wasn’t as cut and dried and that. It took a long time and I went through various processes of being really, really happy, really, really sad. And things that happened in my life affected that, you know. If I get a girlfriend that would be even better. If I’d lost one then I’d get worse. Have an argument with my friends get worse. Started to feel comfortable with the group of friends that I had, get better. Do you know what I mean? And it was a constant balance and drugs just sort of weaved in and out of that. And it was, you know.

Yeah I phoned them up. I made an appointment with them for the next week. I went down to see them, I had a very short interview. They had all my details and everything off me about both my personal details and about my drug use and all the rest of it. And they then referred me to a doctor for prescribing the methadone. I went to see them and as a precautionary measure they start you off on 30mls a day just so you don’t overdose basically. That wasn’t quite holding me. So the next week I went up to 35mls and then from there on I’ve been reducing. I haven’t used within the first week of me starting me methadone. I stopped using heroin pretty much straight away and last summer I went over to live in Wales for 6 months. I was working over there so I’ve rebuilt the relationship with my family, friends. I’ve got a whole new life now that I didn’t have before because I totally destroyed it. To be honest a lot of it was excitement because I hadn’t got to get up every day, find money to score, go out get the drugs, come back, have a hit. You know what I mean. it’s just a big weight off your mind. As I’ve just said I started off 30mls which wasn’t really enough but it was enough to get by, you know what I mean. It was a hell of a lot better than what I’d been used to. So yeah it was a big weight off my mind really.

Well when I started methadone, as I said I started off on 30 ml that was then put to 35 which was enough to hold me. So I was getting no withdrawal symptoms whatsoever physically speaking. Obviously getting a few cravings but that’s mental. It’s only recently I’ve been dropping that down. I’m down to 16 ml now a day. It’s only recently I’ve been starting to suffer withdrawal symptoms again. This is like 18 months later. Even so I’m not suffering too many. I’m feeling a bit depressed every now and again and get the shakes, lack of energy that sort of thing. But it’s not too severe, it’s cope with able. And obviously you need to carry on with that to keep coming down and eventually get off it. And because you drop down in percentages as it gets lower the amount you drop gets more if you see what I mean. So if you’re on 30 ml you take 2 ml away you’re on 28 ml but if you’re on 5ml and you take 2 ml away that’s like 40%. You know what I mean, so it’s a lot more.

Oh yeah it’s very difficult. I mean there’s been times where the cravings have been so bad I can actually taste heroin in my mouth. You know and yourmouth is watering because you want it that badly but you’ve got to remember that it is only a craving. It will go away. You know it only lasts 10 or 15 minutes, half an hour. if it feels as though you want to use you’ve got to remind yourself and convince yourself that it is just a craving and get through it like that, constantly convince yourself that you don’t need to use and the craving will go away on its own, you know what I mean.

As I’ve already mentioned I would like to go into some sort of drugs work whether that be drug counselling or prescribing or. I don’t know I’ve not particularly thought about it. I’d just like to get into the field and see what’s out there. I have looked into it to some degree and from what I can gather you have to have two years experience voluntarily before you can get into it. So I could do with finding somewhere now that will take me on voluntarily where I can do that, get my experience and then get a proper job out ofit in the end.

It was a realisation but it was. This is, see this is again in our culture this is a very difficult thing to get your head around. Ok. The first thing after that moment was that I called a friend of my father’s who’s long-standing, was sober for a long time in Alcoholics Anonymous and he took me to an AA meeting. I think on the Monday, on the Monday night. For the next year and a half I went to just a shit load of AA and NA meetings Now it took me, I was 2½ years in to realise that the answers for me, I mean I can’t say how these experiences. I’ve got, a lot of my friends are recovering alcoholics and addicts. I can’t say how they’ve experienced these things but the way that I live my life today on a good day is, meditation is extremely important to me. Hence all the stuff with the Gita, helping another alcoholic and addict in AA and NA and taking a moral inventory i.e. when I’ve done something wrong I admit it and say sorry. And really you know I mean AA has kind of helped me to get that structure in my life, the Twelve Step programme. Well I think that like in any given week I would probably go to maybe two or three AA or NA meetings and when I’m there I will try and carry the message that was brought to me. it’s got nothing to do with me, you know, it’s just the message of Alcoholics Anonymous. If people like it, if people are willing to engage with it openly and honestly then there is a chance that their lives will be changed and god will start doing something for them that they can’t do for themselves

Yeah, about that. Smoked quite a lot when I was nineteen, once I’d moved out of home and moved into a flat with, with friends, and yeah I could smoke in, well I was, I was smoking in my flat so I hadn’t done that at home, but there I felt I could so, probably had it more frequently and stopped smoking it when I was about nineteen, twenty suppose, yeah must have been about, just about twenty. Why? I started to get Paranoia and I was also smoking cigarettes and I wanted to stop smoking the cigarettes and the, I was getting, yeah I was getting kind of social Paranoia sometimes from, from smoking the, the marijuana, so… So was that affecting your social life that’s what you have told me? Yeah. Yeah? Yeah I think… yeah it probably was. It didn’t stop me from interacting with them I’d still, yeah I’d still go out with them, or whatever, but I would, maybe, yeah we’d, we’d, if we were going out and we’d been drinking in my flat I’d maybe smoke a joint on the way out as well when we were walking to a club it wouldn’t stop me from, probably going out with them but yeah other, other times I’d, I’d say I got Paranoid about my, probably about my health, not social situations, I’d never had, I know there’s quite a lot of stigma attached to it with people being Paranoid about their surroundings which it wasn’t so much for me it was more about, my, like I overreacted to my health so if I got a sore chest I thought I was having like a heart attack yeah, or if I had a headache I thought I had something worse and I suppose it made me a bit of a hyper, hypochondriac but, socially was still fine with my friends, so I kind of wanted to, and I was aware of that so I wanted to stop smoking for that reason, and it took me a while, I had to, I found it difficult to stop when I was still smoking cigarettes so I stopped to, pretty much at the same time  which, took a while to, to be able to stop that but. Yeah, so that was when I was about twenty that I, I stopped smoking, and stopped smoking the smoking the marijuana. How easy or how difficult it was to, to stop? It was mainly the smoking the cigarettes that I found the hard part, so I’d cut right back on, on the smoking smoking weed but, while I was still smoking cigarettes I’d sometimes think oh instead of having a cigarette I’ll have a joint because there’s less tobacco in it. I found it very difficult to, to stop smoking the weed but it, the, while I was still smoking the cigarettes there was always the temptation to smoke the weed and then once I did manage to, to stop smoking the cigarettes it’s easier just to stop smoking the weed altogether, which I wanted to do but at the same time, it was almost habit by then and I was probably, psychologically dependent on it, I wouldn’t say that I was physically addicted, I was to the cigarettes I’d say, but yeah but I’d, I stopped probably after about six months of starting to stop, that I’d try, trying to stop, it took me probably about six months to actually stop it now.

The voices were telling me how worthless I was and how nobody cared, and how pointless my existence was, and that I would be better off not on this earth. And, I thought, well, you know, nobody’s listening to me so may be the voices are right. And then the depression would kick in and I’d think, well there’s nothing worth living for so I’d try. I didn’t want to die. I just wanted to be rid of the voices. I mean I heard the voices in my sleep. I’ve had no respite for nearly 15 years of voices. And that’s so wearing. That just grinds you down. And they are horrible. Some people’s voices are mildly derogatory, mine are abusive and threatening. There are four men. I don’t know who they are. I just know they are my voices, and they are just vile.

And sometimes you get extremely kind voices as well. I got reminded to take my medication when I came out of hospital at one point. I was having difficulty, I didn’t have a, a proper system for sorting out my medication, and I saw a friend of mine on the bus, and he was going up to the psychiatric unit to see some friends, and he was like, Oh hi. How you’re doing I said, Yes, fine. But I keep forgetting to take my medication and that And I suppose that was half past one, two oclock in the afternoon. Around came 5 oclock and I got in my head the voice, medication’, which was the call at the hospital at 5 oclock for people to come and queue up for medication, you know, so, they can be, you know, that’s a really practical salvation as well. But they can boost your confidence or whatever, you know. Sometimes obviously they can boost it a bit too much and you get on your high horse, but you know, they can be extremely useful and kind and helpful as well, yes.

To start with they were always outside, so if I was in a building I could hear them outside the window. That’s how they started, so I always thought they, if and voices very clever they will take on the form of another person’s voice so it will appear as it’s coming from that person. So they’re very clever. And when you don’t know that this is what’s happening, you’re completely taken in and think these people are abusing you. And then you know, as things got worse and worse I’d hear them on the phone when I was speaking to friends, family on the phone, in the background which led me to believe that things were being done electronically. So it’s just a, process of reasoning how, you know, how am I hearing these things. Where is it coming from? Whos doing it to me? So I had like ten years of that, you know, and it’s and it’s just your mind trying to ration and reason with how, where’s it coming from. Because obviously you’ve got no concept that it’s coming from inside your head because it’s too realistic. So So yes, then I’d start hearing them from various electronic devices, you know, if there was a, say a smoke alarm in the corner of the room, they’d emanate from there. So it’s, it’s the voices. they’re I mean my frame of reference now that it’s another facet of my soul that’s doing it. But it’s actually a, an entity with its own thoughts. Psychiatrists will tell you that it’s just your own thoughts, but you know, I don’t buy that at all. This thing thinks for itself, and tries to trip you up and play games with you, every step of the way. There’s no doubt about that. Yes. And then a, you know, a bit later I actually started hearing them inside my head. That was really scary at first. So then I had I don’t know if it’s helpful to like go into the delusions that it created, just trying to figure out what was happening. But then I thought oh gosh, I’m linked up to satellites and all sorts, and they’re beaming voices actually into my head. I was thinking, how are they doing this?

Oh yeah. I think my mum she is what I’d call anti-cannabis. I think her opinion’s skewed slightly. You know like humans look for connections in everything. She had a brother who had mental health issues and he also was a cannabis user so she makes the assumption that those two things are linked. Now I’m not a psychologist or I don’t do anything like that so I can’t say whether they are or they aren’t but I think it’s just as. I think it’s just as bad to make an assumption either way to just assume something like that whether, whether you can say or it isn’t because in the same light that one person could say perhaps my uncle could say well he smoked weed. He’s got a mental health issue or I could say, well I’m a productive member of society. I’ve got a good job. I smoke weed. You know like those kind of arguments no one can ever win them.

Yeah I mean. I mean yeah I’ve read up on. I know that there’s. I know that… a person who has schizophrenia or psychosis is more likely statistically to be a cannabis user. I also know of, there’s been a study that shows perhaps that long term use throughout adolescence can have an effect which. I did start using in adolescence. I wouldn’t call it long term heavy use during adolescence. I think generally it’s difficult to prove either way. It’s difficult to prove either way as far as whether someone actually, whether that’s the cause because just because something proceeds another it doesn’t mean that it caused it. But I think if I ever had any doubt in my mind that I thought things weren’t right in my brain then perhaps it might be the first thing I’d look at. But I’m  I don’t know, I’m a pretty stable guy. I do go to Amsterdam once or twice a year to enjoy cannabis which is a bit of time away from my son with just me and whatever friends that I go there with.

Yeah as opposed to here because obviously it’s so culturally engrained in me in this country that I must hide this. I don’t want people to see this. You know it’s not something that you do in public. It’s not really socially accepted here. So then to go into a country where it is socially accepted to an extent it’s, it’s an odd feeling. I mean actually the last time I was there I was quite paranoid because I was like. I don’t know why, just because it’s so out in the open I just like. I mean I’m sure if I was there for a week, I’ve only ever been for a few days, I mean I’m not, in fact I’ve not had that every time I’ve gone. It’s only happened twice where I’ve got a bit like anxious in one coffee shop and then the last time I went as well. But it’

Yes, you hear voices in third person, and that feels from a male. And you believe that, not inside your head, outside your head. They don’t control you, and you don’t control them. They don’t tell you to do things. Don’t give you orders. And they are there constantly, when I’m sitting here with you, I’m distracted, but as soon as you leave I will hear them. Or on the bus I will hear them. And it’s generally like just a form of commentary. Sometimes it’s positive, sometimes it’s negative. Sometimes it pejorative, sometimes not so. And, yes, pretty much constantly really.

I think, I think that might have something to do with the fact that, the sort of mental state I was in at the time sort of struggling with anxiety issues and stuff. But I mean I had smoked marijuana before this occasion where I reacted badly to it and, you know, hadn’t had, didn’t have a particularly strong effect on me. But there was this one time I think I was 15 and or 16 in sort of  Park someone was passing around a joint and, you know, I had a couple of draws on it and I got intensely sort of very intensely paranoid and like sort of to the point where I couldn’t really speak and I was sick and I didn’t. Sort of since then I remember sort of going home and sort of having sort of mental battle with myself or just feeling very intensely sort of paranoid and worried. And sort of since then I was always much more cautious about smoking marijuana and it’s something that I sort of don’t really do now.

Yes I have. I’ve tried cocaine. I was on cocaine for quite a while it was probably about two or three months and it got so bad that I actually, a couple of times felt withdrawal when I was at work and actually did a couple of lines at work. I’ve also done hash or hashish, whatever you want to call it, magic mushrooms, ketamine, MDMA or mandy’ whatever you want to call it, speed, ecstasy. I’ve done quite a few. Looking back it seemed like a good idea at the time but now it’s just, it’s not, it’s not the best of ideas. And I do regret, I do regret getting deeply involved with them. I don’t regret trying them because I believe life’s all about experimentation. It’s ok if you can keep control but the second you start losing it you really need to get help and I didn’t. I mean I from, I mean from chronic use of cannabis I have developed paranoia. And you know I do, I do still occasionally smoke it but not on the scale that I was back then.

It is. It is really hard, yes, that idea of being over, yes it is hard to over rule yourself, because it is so kind of there. You can’t over well you can and you can’t over rule yourself. You can’t really. Or I think you can may be in terms of your behaviour, but you can’t in terms of your thoughts. I think that’s probably as good as it gets with me, is not to act it out. Is not in terms of mental health services that’s what they sort of say to me, because it’s like, you know, may be you won’t ever get rid of all those kind of thoughts, but it’s not acting them out, and it’s not kind of escalating it into the real world. it’s like, you know, if you think your house is on fire, you know, but like what per cent of you knows it’s not on fire. don’t phone the fire brigade. Yes. Because actually the person, mental health services are quite, a little bit concerned, the fact that I pulled down my sleeves, because then that was like a really small thing that I’d actually modified my behaviour.

I was feeling like I couldn’t cope with being like talking to people I mean I’d walk along a corridor like in halls and say if there was someone walking towards you or towards me I mean, normally it would just be okay there’s a person walking towards me I’d say, smile or be hello if I knew them or like just stop and chat if I knew them like a bit better and that’ll be it, but in that state of mind I was as they were getting closer and closer to me I’d be dreading the conversation that I was about to have with them and I’d think please don’t talk to me, please don’t talk to me and going from like so sociable like always being like really like involved in like sort of going out and chatting and meeting new people to suddenly like not be able to communicate almost forgetting how to talk to people and being so nervous. I’d, like still so paranoid and just like all this built up, built up, built up and then like I say my mind was just racing constantly like thoughts flying around like daming thoughts about myself or sort of thinking like what have I done and that’s the only point in my life where I thought Okay this is it, you’ve completely done it, you’ve completely ruined yourself like what have you done and like and this was like quite sad to say like why, this was the only time I actually thought about like sort of, sort of topping myself and it had like got to that stage where I was like I can’t live the rest of my life like this, this I can’t actually like go through the rest of my life and I can’t see a way out of it.

Well he was saying that I, it appears that I’m depressed and like. And that I, this visit to the GP I was only telling him about the cannabis and the ecstasy. I wasn’t saying about the acid or some of the other things that I was  doing. And at that point I was doing anything. I wasn’t using some, actually yeah that’s not true. I had at that point smoked crack but I wasn’t using that actually at the flat and I hadn’t done that regularly. That was a one-off thing I done with my mate and actually I was a lot younger when I done that. But like yeah the doctor. I told the doctor some of it. He was like, you know, You’ve obviously had something wrong with you. He wrote me off work. That’s what I wanted. I got three months off work. I had these antidepressants. So I started taking them and doing my drugs. I’d take them regularly and he was trying me on different ones and it got to the point that I couldn’t leave the flat. I was, I felt like I was a goldfish in a bowl like. And I tried to get out the door and I couldn’t physically like. I had no food and the shop was just over the road because I lived right in the centre of everything. So all I had to do was make it across that road. Get some food and come back in and I couldn’t do it. In the end my friend, one of my friend’s at the time he had to bring me food from his house. He used to steal it and bring it to me so I would eat for the two months that I was off work because I wouldn’t go out. Eventually once I started going back to work I still was getting really down. I was still getting depressed. I thought I was depressed I’d go up to the pub and I’d talk to people and tell them how depressed I was and how shit my life is. But then I’d go out and smoke a load of weed and drinking a load of beer and that. And, you know it got to the point that I was crying. I was just at the pub crying at people just saying how shit my life is. I want to die, everything is fucking crap like, you know what I mean. What’s the point in it? Still I was smoking weed, drinking, doing pills. You know because that was fine, life was fine once I had a smoke. I’d just sit there quiet just like, you know. But what I think happened is I started. Although I had been although I’d not realised very introverted for, when I was smoking weed I thought a lot of the time I was an extrovert and I was joining in. But sometimes I know I spoke to people, sometimes people would look in my eyes and there’d be nothing there. And I’d be just zonked I’d like and I’d have no feelings, no emotions at all. I’d just, I’d taken a lot out of myself. So yeah, basically I started to cut down on weed thinking, This has got to be it, man. This skunk is the problem. Because I’d like, I’d long surpassed smoking dirt but by then it was skunk all the time. And that, the whole thing was to me, this is my life, you know what I mean. But at the same time it was eating away at me and they were, it was eating away at me.

Feeling depressed, not getting on with people, feeling too scared to do things, not doing well at college. Not being able to talk to my parents and have a decent relationship with my parents, not having any money to buy things I wanted. All of that was down to drugs. Then my depression because I did end up going to the doctors again and getting more tablets and they referred me to a psychiatric place. That was mostly down to smoking weed. I’d basically I’d smoked. It got to the point when I smoked weed and like I’d hear people saying horrible things about me like in my head. And I could actually hear the people say, you know, You’re shit. You’ve done this, you done. Yeah. And I have done some horrible things, you know, of course I have of. I was completely off my brain half the time. And cannabis was really, really to blame. I’ve looked into it a bit more now , like you know long term effects of cannabis can cause, you know, depression, becomes long term depression and I think it’s definitely done it. I think about taking the other things like the hallucinogenic side like acid and mushrooms, PCP, I get flashbacks or well not even flashbacks like. Sometimes I get a really strong d√©j√† vu that I feel I know what’s going to happen next and I actually like see it, visualise it in my head and that. I don’t take drugs anymore. I’m clean now. I just, they were no good for me. I know I made a decision to give up drugs probably completely I’d like to say 8 years ago. And I didn’t manage it until about 5/6 years ago. I wasn’t taking drugs when I started being a youth worker. It was. I wasn’t 100% off but I was nearly off but it’s not easy like. Smoking weed was my first step. I stopped smoking weed because that was a constant through all of my life like, it felt like. All my drug taking like that was the constant thing. But that was what was causing me the most difficulty. I’d have a smoke and I’d just go. I’d start to realise that I would go blank quite and I wouldn’t be able to interact with people.

Because of the effects, yeah. And I got better. I stopped going to get help because like the doctor at the psychiatric place I went sort of pointed out that he thinks it’s cannabis. I was on. When I got there I was honest about it, obviously he weren’t happy about me getting hallucinogenics and that and he reckoned that somebody like me that could be problematic] which obviously it was . And you know cannabis was first out and I felt so much better. You know, I thought it would be really hard because that was one of our set routines but I managed to sort of step out of that and I just started smoking more because I was smoking nicotine like so I just started smoking more and that sort of covered me for that. Yeah it was a bit weird at first but now if I was in a situation where someone was smoking cannabis it wouldn’t even bother me like you know. Don’t even interest me in the slightest because I know what it does to me. And that’s what makes me laugh when people like go Oh yeah cannabis is ok. It’s like actually I know it’s not. It’sreally not.

I mean if somebody came up to me now and said, Do you want some cocaine’? I mean I’d probably smack them in the face to be completely honest with you because I do not agree with it anymore. I mean I’ve been there. I’ve tried it et cetera but I’m a lot more aware of the dangers of it now rather than I was when I was taking it. You know, it’s a foreign body being taken into you. I mean with the smoking it’s not healthy but your body can take it. Whereas you’re snorting something up your nose you know, it’s that close to the brain, I mean that’s quite scary. I didn’t know that by then and if I had known that I probably wouldn’t have gone down that route and tried so much.

I have a two and a half year old son and I don’t want that around him  I couldn’t risk being completely off my face if something happened, so no. I think part of me misses, misses the drugs, I think because you do get a good buzz off some of them and you have some, some good experiences in a, quite a weird way, so, I do miss it sometimes and there is like the temptation, to think I can just call up one of my old friends and I’ll have a spliff in half an hour’ so you’ve got to be quite…

In every way really I was bitchy, I was nasty, I was snide, I didn’t care, and now I do, I’m, I now have a lot going for me but I didn’t feel like I did then. I have pride in myself, I’m proud to be who I am and what I’ve got, it may not be a lot to some people but this is what I’ve got. So, and for what I’ve, for what I’ve come, come through, and through all my experiences to be here now saying all this, I’m very proud of that fact. So I’m a completely different person to who I was back then.

My motivation for not using drugs is because I’ve got my daughter, I am responsible for somebody else’s life, I don’t want to, it is not just mine I am going to be ruining it is hers as well. another motivation is now I have had, as far as I am concerned I have had my time, I have tried what I have tried, I have done what I have done, now it is time for me to be an adult, grow-up and get on in the real world, get a job, get a car, be driving, take her to nursery and school, I am not just a, teenage person now, I am a teenage mum, I am responsible for me and my daughter that’s mainly my motive, my motivation is because of her.

Don’t think because of what I have said that it is a good idea to have a baby because you are going to like, you have got someone there and you are never on your own and, you, do you know what I mean? You are not going to, you are going to stop doing your wild stuff because you have child because that is not always true. It is down to you whether you can motivate yourself and whether you are strong enough, because I know mums that still drink, that still do drugs, did it all throughout the pregnancy, they still do it now round their children, I know people that do that, they are not strong enough to stop doing that, it is just, you, that was just the situation I found myself in and I have learnt to deal with that, but if I could, I don’t regret her, but if I could change time I would change it so that I did it later on in life.

Well when people ask me like why I don’t take drugs, I say like three main topics. The first one like the foremost is my wellbeing like you just said like sort of like just my health I’ll just go downhill like I won’t be able to succeed in life. And also the second one is if I start doing drugs now then I would, even just a line of cocaine or whatever, I wouldn’t have progressed I would have gone back on myself, I’ve been through that sort of stage in life and I won’t, I don’t want to go back to that and I would have felt I’d gone back on myself and reverted on myself. And the third one is like no one will ever have anything over me in life like in society or workplace or if I don’t take drugs not because, although even though I have like a sort of a with me personally I it’s sort of I’m quite sort of anti drugs on a personal level but I don’t judge other people for them taking drugs but a lot of other people are not like that.

Like I’ve come to value an awful lot being present in my own mind and body I got into and I’m just getting into Buddhism again actually in that Buddhism is very much about being present in one’s body. If you use drugs very often I think you tend to drift a lot more because you’re spending more of your time intoxicated. You’re spending less time interacting with people. I’d much rather for example, learn. I’ve always had issues with some sort of social interaction. I’ve never been particularly able talking to strangers. I get anxious in social situations. And drugs have been a way to ease off that a little bit. And now I’m in the place where I’d much rather learn to interact and go through all that instead of using drugs to make it easier. Because ultimately I don’t want to need a crutch to get by. See yeah there’s a very strong element of wanting to be in control.

I stopped taking heroin at that point but what that did and I didn’t see what that did. It just shifted all of that addictive behaviour over to the drinking. So my drinking just went out of control. I mean I, I’ll use an example. I started doing my dissertation a couple of months after that. Now my dissertation is a fucking fabulous piece of work. I got 69%, one off a first for it. I have no memory of writing my dissertation at all. What I would do at the beginning of every evening, and I mean every single evening is that I’d work in the library from about 5 o’clock to 10 o’clock. I would go to – I lived in a huge halls of residence, a huge block. Underneath that was an off licence. I would go there. I would buy three bottles of white wine, two packets of cigarettes and I worked from 10 o’clock at night to 6’00 in the morning typing, drinking, smoking, typing, drinking, smoking. At 6’00 in the morning I was so hyper, my mind was so blown wide open that I’d have to roll a skunk joint basically just to get myself off to sleep. I’d wake up at 2 o’clock in the afternoon and then at 5 o’clock I’d be in the library and I’d do the same again and again and again and again. It’s a brilliant dissertation. It got the highest mark of anyone in my year. It’s fabulous.

Well I’m not, I mean I’m not an idiot. Like, I knew that I’d been very, very, very lucky. I knew that I’d been lucky and I was like – and also it’s got, of all the drugs really there are two drugs out of all of them that people in mainstream society view as being the dirty ones is heroin and crack. And I never, I never took crack. It was never really. It was just never there but I knew that I had this fucking degree to get and my willpower, my ego was so huge  that. I mean I was never going to get my degree let alone get a good 2’1 which is what I got in the end if I was going to carry on doing this, you know. And so I stopped but really I stopped but it didn’t really affect my daily life because I was still abusing myself tremendously. I was just doing it in a more socially salubrious sort of way but those days were really. I mean, yeah really. I mean it, you know when people talk about hardcore addiction, or like hardcore alcoholism, mine was between August ’04 and January ’06. Some people’s hardcore addiction goes on for 20, 30 years and I just don’t know how they fucking do it. I’d never be able to do it.

No it wasn’t especially at first because these are people I’d grown up with all my life. I’d known them since I was about five years old some of them. So even though you’ve been through all the drug use and all the rest of it and it’s destroyed your life they are still a big part of your life, what’s left of it. You know what I mean. So you naturally try and hold on to that. So yeah that’s quite emotional but saying that, the drugs block out your emotions anyway. So I didn’t feel it too much at the time.

I’d love to say that I’d never go back to the way I was but in all honesty if my life was to fall apart it’s probably the first thing I’d do. Recently I lost, I lost a big chunk of one of my jobs. I lost 24 hours. My first reaction was to head for the pub that I used to go to all the time. And I did get out and I did got extremely drunk and it wasn’t a working day so that was alright. But the way I was feeling, you know, the way I was feeling I could, I was wobbling. Luckily my friends were very supportive of me. They kept me away from doing anything I regretted. But I probably could, you know, if I hadn’t of had my girlfriend and other things to make me think, Hold on don’t do anything silly’ I could have slipped into it again. So…

Because I lost something that was precious to me. I, like I said before, youth work means a lot to me. You know, it’s one of my reasons for being like I am. So if I was to lose say, god I shouldn’t even say it, but say my partner was to ever go or take my child or whatever or something was to happen to anybody that I loved I would have a hard time staying the way I am. And that’s scares me, that really scares me because I know the attraction. I know that if I wanted to feel nothing I could go and I could get that. I could feel better, you know. It’s only a matter of 20 minutes then I’ll be alright. Do you know what I mean? But I wouldn’t really be alright. But, so that does scare me. But I think if I ever get into that situation I’d leave the area because if I’m not in this area then I’ve got a lot less access to things, you know. One of my ambitions actually is to move away from here. I do love it. I’ve got some really close friends here but I’ve done a lot of things there, I don’t know. But I think to take, to take me to a new level so that I’ve got a fresh start, you know, I can develop what I’ve developed already. I think moving away and going somewhere new would be good for me and my family. And I think we could develop it and I feel that would be good.

The problem is there’s a lot of relationships with children and parent where they are either too embarrassed to ask it or they just haven’t got that relationship, you know, with their parents. You know my parents I’ve got an open relationship with them and I, if, if they ask the question they get the truth, and they know that, you know, so if they don’t want to know the answer they don’t ask the question. but I think some kids maybe don’t get exposed to alcohol at an age so they kind of go and try and a little, they don’t talk about drugs because the parents kind of think well no let’s not talk about drugs because they’ll go and try them’ instead of maybe talking about the drugs and what the consequences are and everything like that for the kid to kind of think well I don’t need to experiment because I know what it does you know?’ if they know that LSD kind of can make you, I mean my Dad like, you know, told me about LSD when I was kind of ten years old, and he told me when he worked in a Police Station that there was a lad in a cell screaming to high heaven because he thought there was a giant tarantula in the cell with him, now, knowing that at ten years old am I going to go and try LSD knowing that that kind of terrifying experience could happen? And there’s no control over what experience I have, you know, having spoken to people now, some people have good experiences, you know, as you probably know, you hear, Oh I had a bad trip. There’s, what there is absolutely nothing that controls that situation whether you have a good or bad trip so why put you in that, put yourself in that position where if you have one of those bad trips you’re going to have a lot of hours of very horrible experiences? So I don’t understand the point ofdoing it, putting yourself in that situation. Knowing these things you don’t, you don’t kind of experiment with them. I think, the thing is you need to get, the, that message needs to be put across at quite a young age, I think, because as I keep saying, you know, fifteen years old people are going clubbing, that’s probably not the first time they’ve had a drink or been exposed to drugs, the message needs to be quite early, you know, when, drum it into them kind of thing that, you know, the goods, the good, the bad and the consequences of all of these actions because if they go and find it themselves I think that’s when the problems happen.

Yes, I think it’s something that’s brought up in the media quite a lot, particularly in Scotland, Scotland’s got quite a, quite a bad reputation for, for yeah alcohol abuse, it’s one of the, one of the main strains on the health service in Scotland I think is alcoholism, or high levels yeah so, yeah I’m aware, I’m aware of it it’s, I think it’s a bigger problem in the west coast of Scotland than the east coast so, and I can’t say any of my family have got, yes have a problem kind of alcohol problems so not directly, I’ve, I’ve not been involved in it but again from the media I’m aware of the, yeah the long term implications of yeah alcohol abuse.

Yeah probably the, they have a campaign aimed at sort of my age group I’d say, I remember they had posters, probably about two years ago which, they, the message hit you pretty hard and it was, they had adverts on tv as well actually but it’s, it seemed mainly targeted at the youth binge drinking sort of culture, you know, where do you draw the line? Where’s too much? And it would have… have  they were, they were good adverts and then they’d have posters that would remind you of the TV adverts but it was basically showing the same person on the same night out and two different paths they could take, one was having too much to drink and falling over the pavement and falling out the taxi, and losing their, their wallet or their bag and being sick and losing shoes and just what, yeah what can be associated with someone who’s had too muchalcohol and then one, someone who’s not had too much but still had a, they’ve still had a few, had a good time but been responsible, and then they’d have these posters on the bus stops sort of just like, like someone lying in the gutter, sick in their hair and just, like I say like a shoe missing sort of thing. I’d, I’m trying to remember, what the, what the main catchphrase was but it had Drink Aware at the bottomyou know? and they were pretty vivid pictures, I remember that being quite a good campaign which made you think about, yeah it made you think about how much you’d have when you’re on a night out and, maybe if you were tempted to like get carried away and keep drinking, you know it made you stop and think

I think not many people are made aware about how easily people can get addicted and dependent on drugs. Because some people think, Oh just once it will be fine. I’ll not do it again. And then a couple of weeks later they’ll think, Oh I’ll do it again. Last time I did it were a couple of weeks ago. It’s not like it were yesterday so I’ll do it again. And then they keep that attitude and then sooner or later it’s like day in day out with they’re wanting drugs and coming dependent and they’re like throwing their life away because that’s all they care about.

But I have an interesting point I’d like to say about wine that I feel is something I don’t think people realise. When I was younger at school they talked about. My education they talked about drugs really well and it was around the time that a couple of girls had died of Ecstasy in clubs so they were very, very hot on talking about that but no one really ever told us about alcohol. I don’t know what it’s like now because I imagine people, the government has put in a lot more effort into alcohol nowadays. But when I was 15 alcohol is something I see my parents do all the time. I was allowed a glass of wine at a wedding. And I genuinely had no idea how alcoholic wine was because in my childlike understanding I was allowed wine at a wedding therefore it mustn’t be so bad. It was only when I started to get some pretty bad hangovers I realised how bad wine, how alcoholic wine is.

Again I think when you’re younger you’re a bit more naive, you don’t really, I mean they had, they had like loads of posters and so it was always there like to make sure like you don’t do it too sort of thing, there’s all these signs and teachers would talk about it as well, but I think the, and I think when you’re younger you’re a lot more naive, you don’t really take into account what they’re actually saying, and I think in a way it will become a bit more intriguing and a bit more, curious, become a lot more curious I think.

If I was worried I would turn to the internet, I would just search it I think, that’s probably where most people would go, and I’m sure there’s, I mean like Youthhealthtalk’ , there’s good websites available with information and help and then I think you take it from there, you would talk to your other friends about it and just, you know, ask if they’ve noticed anything, yeah I think there is, there is a, there’s enough if you wanted to find the resources to help someone out, I don’t think you would feel like, there wasn’t what you were looking for, there’s, you know, there’s the resources available for you if you wanted them I think.

I think you look for perhaps names you know, I think would be something or like websites with credibility behind them, and researchers or, you know, what, scientific fact, you know? But I, I think on the whole you would be, it wouldn’t be, you know, you would, I think you would trust what information you found on the internet, if there was you know the first out of ten million it, you know, you would hope that it was a site that other people were using as credibility, you know, knows what it’s talking about, and I think as an aspect of commonsense to knowing, you know, maybe you could talk to your GP, I, I think you, you would betrustingand you would know what to look for.

In like the end of last year so it was sort of August, September last year, and then that was the first time I actually knew anything about units to, oh no I had seen the labels on the bottles too but I didn’t really pay any attention  you know? Because when you’re out you sort of, I remember you know you’d always had enough, well this, this is how we used to judge it anyway, you always knew you had enough when you just couldn’t remember things anymore, so like if you were drinking and you got to the point where you were just like, . And then you think that’s enough’, or you felt sick, that was the only , that was the only information I had, you know, regarding how much you should drink. It was only, like I said when we did our own project and we looked into it and we, we searched it I realised how, that I realised first that I was binge drinking because I didn’t think it was binge drinking I thought I was having a good time.

I think the best thing is to seek knowledge from people who have had drugs experience themselves before you try drugs because you don’t know what you are getting yourself into. When I started to use heroin I’d only used cannabis before that and tried a few other drugs. And I thought, ok I knew it was highly addictive but I thought it was just the same as being addicted to cannabis but worse, worse in that you’re just going to crave it. I didn’t know there was any physical element to withdrawal symptoms. You know, I thought I’d still be able to get up in the morning and function. And that’s not the case you can’t, you can’t move. You can’t do anything. It just grips you. So yeah make sure you know what you are doing before you try it.

Kasim’ But in a way where the young person can relate to the person they are talking to them about. Because if you, I don’t know, with me because when I was a teaching assistant, a youth worker I found out that a lot of the kids related to me better because of my age and stuff. And I think age does have a big part to play with it because I mean if you’re say, I don’t know, 17, 18 and you’re telling me about weed and stuff it’s just going to go in one ear and out the other.

Yeah, yeah, yeah a lot more than like my mum and dad do. They don’t help me, you get more educated about drugs at school than you do at home. Probably, something that would work for me is like having an ex drug user tell me like, This is what I used to be. And like you see how he’s changed and what happened to him like because he’s there telling you in first-hand what happened, what he did when he was on drugs. And then you’d like think, Ah look what it can do. That would probably work better for me like if an ex drug user came in.

There needs to be more of a shock value. Maybe real life stories of people actually going in there, you know. For example I think I’d be scared if my mum had actually come in to my classroom at 37, not me personally but obviously went into a classroom at 37 and said, Look I’ve lost 6 children. I’m highly addicted to heroin over the years. And obviously can’t calculate how much she’s actually put on that addiction, you know. And it might, you know I’m not saying obviously to try that at school but you definitely might try some drugs and then, you know, because there’s different forms of where you can take heroin and things like that but maybe they would go on to that or maybe they’ve seen it around them and not wondered or thought, you know, Oh come on it’s cool’ and things like that and it’s really not. I reckon if people were to go into a school or even 6th Form at that age and things like that really, obviously youth clubs and, you know to get the real shock value of actually someone saying, Look I’ve got nothing to show for my age at 37. You know that would be a real shock value rather than so much. I’d say that would probably in my opinion, get more across than somebody giving out a leaflet saying, Three units a day’ and things like that sort of thing to a young person.

Lights seem to glow brighter and brighter, things floated against my eyes, covered my eyes, they disappeared and on another occasion when I closed my eye they still remained, so I was really, really ill. The last episode when I still living at home was that I felt like some force was turning me round in a circle in the room. It was literally trying to push me downstairs but the force, I know it might sound bizarre in itself but this is what seemed to have happened to me like you’re on this roundabout and you’re just turning and you get dizzy but the thing was I feel like there’s something pulling me from inside, inside my body and pushing me towards the door to the stairs. I opened the door with my elbow, there’s a flight of probably twelve stairs, steep stairs because it’s old semi-detached house similar to this one I live in now very steep stairs. So when the bizarreness seemed to be pulling me and pushing me down the stairs, I had to literally sit on my bottom and go down the stairs on my bum otherwise I felt like I would’ve being thrown forward down the stairs. My family was down stairs and said to them, Oh my God, what’s had happened? Something had gone on here.

Well it’s almost like a sort of, I mean it’s almost like you get that, if you get a sort of euphoric sort of it’s not really connected, it’s just like a sort of, a sort of rising… it’s like, almost like an opening out of your sort of being, in a way you feel, you know, you’re in a sort of psychic realm where you’re thinking about, like you’re thinking you’re, you’re bigger than all this sort of, all the world power structures. Just think it. it’s like this whole thing about being, almost being contained, only it didn’t be contained, because your soul, your whole sort of being seems to be, you know, flying all over a place. I was just kind getting that, it’s hard to, it’s to get a real picture, because I’ve tried to write it down a few times and its, its just a really, it’s like a religious thing. A magic realism something. You’re basically thinking out your body, you know, you’re not really in your body when you’re going through this [coughs]. And that was something that the stayed with me was there for, well not the stayed, but it was that type of things. That was the first instant that it really mean I had a time before that, just before, [coughs] I went into hospital, went through it once. I had a similar thing but I hadn’tit’s like you’re it’s like a bit, or some imagination taken from reading the science fiction or science fantasy or some ridiculous thing. But it’s like that, sort of, you think you’ve got this really massively profound idea that you think you know what time itself is. And Mother Nature and this and that. it’s almost like you think you’re aware of these sort of, you know, fundamental aspects of existence. Without really being very philosophical there, how they really know, you know, they’ve had any like, you know, education in that area but it’s just something seems to flood out and there’s no real, really sort of control mechanisms about it.

In [place name] where you sort of you know, you were under psychiatric supervision or you were close to, you know, you, a place where you’d go, you know, a day centre where you’d just go and pop in and spend the day there and be near the psychiatrists and things and have, you know, be interviewed and people talking to you and stuff. So I did that and shortly after, well, a few months after being there I started hearing voices and deteriorating rapidly and so I couldn’t but tell the doctors there about it. And then I that’s when I was diagnosed as a schizophrenic.

I just lost the plot and was kind of found wandering along my neighbours who were brilliant and they took me in, and they got a doctor. And I don’t remember an awful lot about it. Because I was just in overload at that point, and, was not aware of what was going on. Apparently all I was saying was that I’d let everybody down. I’ve let everybody down. And they were incredibly good to me, and they got a locum from my Gps surgery and she admitted me to hospital. And I was then given a diagnosis of schizo-affective disorder and I can remember [laughter in voice] the interview I had with the psychiatrist, just looking at if I was, you know, I thought I had manic depression or something like that. And she just said, No I’m afraid it’s a bit worse than that And I just said to her, Are you telling me that I’ve go schizophrenia And she said, No. What do you do have is schizo-affective disorder And I thought that’s it. That is it. That’s the end of my useful life. And I think the [exhales] overall feeling then is that you are going to be like it for the rest of your life, and that is going to be your… experience in that you are going to be incredibly ill forever. And I think where hospital care can be lacking, or was, I’m talking about a while ago now, is that they don’t give you any further information. They just put you on a load of drugs.

The only thing you can do really, if you do want to come to terms with it, is to accept it. Say, okay, that is what I’ve got, what am I going to do about it. And… always, always ask for help. Always ask for help. You’re never on your own, and you’re not alone. And I think that initially is the biggest thing, the isolation that you feel, and I think that your family, carer or whatever feels. And I think because there is still this element of shame in the kind of older generation I think more than perhaps nowadays. But they don’t ask for help themselves and they don’t… discuss it. Which again in the initial phases is not an easy thing to do, because you’ve got so much you’ve got to deal with. And, again I think I would say that information is vital, but what a carer needs to know and what the service user needs to know, may not be the same thing at the same time, and that’s where you get an awful lot of conflict. Because in my experience your carer will want to know everything straight away. Me, as a person who is suffering from it would like to access it when I want to. Thank you very much. I don’t want a whole load of stuff on top everything else I’ve got to deal with.

Started working in a music store. And within a couple of years, I’d worked my way up to manager. And I was actually thriving under pressure there for a while. But my social life and my life outside of work was, you know, it wasn’t the norm, as it were. I wasn’t, I presume that I was quite popular at work, but I wasn’t really outgoing or extrovert, or any way confident and that in my social life. And eventually my work life began to suffer as well, and I actually thought I was dying. I was getting a lot of strange symptoms. And I was backwards and forwards to the doctor, and that, and getting different tests done. And then he I’d gone in there one day and he said, Oh, you know, there’syou’re absolutely fine, there’s nothing wrong with you And I just exploded. And that. So he said, Right, now I’m sending you to see a psychiatrist Sort of thing. And that was me in with the mental health service sort of thing.

I took part in marching with the people against what was happening, but after the second night, the second day of me marching, I got a phone call about 2 a.m. in the morning. Which woke me up, and I answered the phone, and it was just this man in Russian, sort of swearing at me, really shouting and swearing at me. And I could, I spoke the language a bit at the time, so I understood he was swearing at me, and he was going on about me, you know, who the hell did I think I was involving myself in their business. And I just put the phone down and then I just sort of started, I started to experience this tenseness inside, and I remember my heart was pounding. And I suddenly started to really fear what I’d done, and, and, and I couldn’t sleep that night, and when I was walking round the hotel the next morning, I was just like, you know, felt that, I’d done something very wrong, and that… you know, that I was going to get harmed in some way. And I started to pick up on, sort of walking round the hotel, I, that people looked at me. I felt that they were, you know, it was they weren’t just looking at me, they all knew who I was and that somehow my life was starting to be in danger and…And it’s possible, you know, it’s… you know, it’s possible that they, they… you know, was I just a tourist? Why was I touring? You know, when all tourists at the time were given the option to leave Moscow and they did. And there’s a few other people that stayed, you know, but may be they were questioning my mean there was a lot of paranoia at the time, you know, with the cold war everything and being sort of… East and West, and they knew I was from the UK, and I think they be, you know, they were thinking who is this man? You know, and, and, so that, that, you know, sort of ignited my paranoia.

Basically I was recording some music off the, off the off the radio, and suddenly I started to hear a kind another voice, apart from the person speaking on the radio and it was quite deep and it was quite gravely and it, it was, kind of, almost sounded a bit demonic. And I thirst of all, it just, it started just for you know, a couple of seconds, then it went, and I thought may be there was a bit of, kind of interference on the radio. But then it was kind of, directed at me, it was going, Dolly, I can see you. I’m watching you And I got so scared. And I unplugged the radio. But I could still hear, this, this voice. And it, it just… to me, I mean now, I know, it was the beginning of my psychosis, but I actually thought, there was, you know, there was a devil in the room with me. And it was speaking to me. And about fifteen minutes, this was about, it happened for about fifteen minutes, and then it kind of faded away. And… well, for the rest of the day, I had nothing. And I thought I didn’t know what it was. I was really upset by it, but I just thought, I thought it had gone. But like the next day it came back. And this time it was like a constant kind of being talked at. You know, like hours and hours, and not only that my thinking started to get strange. I thought people, like on TV were directing kind of, or kind of trying to control my thinking. It was very, in a short period if time, I would say about a week, I went from just having nothing to be kind of totally psychotic, and in fact because I thought I was basically. This is what I thought at the time, that I was being taken over by demons. I kind of, just a week later, I tried to kill myself. It was just, you know, that one week of just having nothing and then just being a person who thought she was, you know, being chased by the devil and wanted to kind of ruin my life. It was, the onset was really, really quick and fast and just total, to me, and totally out of the blue really.

When I was about 27, I realised something was going drastically wrong and I picked up the phone to my then GP and said, I think I need to be in hospital. A psychiatric hospital it’s quite a renowned psychiatric hospital in this area. And her response to that was, Well what do you want to go there for And that was the limit of the help I got from the GP at that time. And so I thought, oh my God I’m on my own. And with that avenue of help gone my mental health really, really deteriorated over the space of about four days. I just one night, I just woke up and I just heard a voice saying to me, Do you really love your Father There was nobody else in the room. I was on my own. And I just remember thinking, yes, I do. Yes, I do. it’s like the whole of the top of your head comes off. There’s just this incredible rush of energy and, and hysteria almost. And, then I started to hallucinate visually, and I just saw this lovely garden, and I thought oh this is heaven. And by that point I was completely lost because then I had an alternative to that, and I really believed I was going to hell. I thought I was dying. I thought I was going to hell. I’m not desperately religious. And I woke up and Mum came into the room and I was completely gone. And we were kind of left to deal with it for a couple of days. I didn’t understand what had happened to me. I really thought I was dying. So I picked up Bible [laughter in voice] and read Revelations which is not a very good thing to do. And for two minutes I actually believed that I was Christ, until I was logical enough to think, well I’m not male, so what’s happening? And eventually I stabbed myself in the liver with a knife, because I believed the world was going to end. I thought somebody was going to break into the house and murder my Mother, and the physical sensations I had of just being about to explode literally. I could feel myself inflating. I just did something out of desperation to stop that feeling.

Like once I went to visit my friends and when I got home, all I could smell of was cats litter. And like it stank. And I was like how the hell has this happened, I didn’t even go near their cat litter. And I was like, oh my God, they’ve cursed me. Do you know what I mean. Just imagine, imagine that in your reality. Like, it’s like, what on earth? But that was like it was liked they cursed me when I went to visit them. They must be witches and stuff like that. It was really bizarre. Yes. Really interesting. I don’t know what that was about or, yes, but I know now looking back, like my experiences, my subconscious was like coming into the front of my brain. So like, weird thoughts that I had, like I think I built up a weird perception of myself, and a weird perception of the world, and then it all exploded, because it got too much. Do you know what I mean?

And this was when I first went in psychosis. Basically I began to stop sleeping. And accompanying that I couldn’t stop thinking and for the first time in years the thought of self-harm became really prominent in my mind again. And I told my wife that that was what I was thinking. And we went to see a GP who made an emergency referral to a psychologist who was going to see me quite quickly to see if we could do something about it. And then it’s really hard to describe what happens. I wasn’t, I was just thinking, and thinking, and thinking, and not relaxing and then everything inverted. And half formed thoughts became very real. I began to think that… my blood had been poisoned by evil spirits and that I was evil, and that there were spirits around me, warping my thoughts and changing my thoughts, and that was very frightening and I didn’t know what to do with it. And I think the worst thing I’ve ever done was one night when our son was in bed, and we were sitting down having a drink, I told my wife, that I had to go to the woods to get rid of the evil in my blood by cutting my wrists. And you know, it’s, it’s something that people don’t know how to respond to. So she just had to watch me walk out the door with razor blades. And… I went to the woods and again I’m so glad I’m such a coward, because I didn’t do much. But what my wife must have gone through knowing that I could die and not knowing why I was doing it. It must have been terrible.

I was bullied constantly. I think I only escaped about one year. But in every school I went to, I was bullied, except for, I think there was just one time when I was in north London that I didn’t get bullied. And I, a lot of it was like more like torture than being bullied, I suppose. And then also I think, you know, having my parents really not being very good psychiatrists in that they weren’t that type of thinking people, you know. And they weren’t clever in that sort of way that I’m just the opposite, and they weren’t able to… they’re only, you know, I mean they never really talked to me, encouraged me to have any kind of friendship or anything with them really. I think my mother thought that children [laughter in voice] should be seen and not heard really. She thought, you know, very primitive thing, and they did tend to be like that, yes, and also… I think also another thing about that they hated one another. And I used to have watch them fighting always. You know, fighting constantly all my life really that I can remember. Sometimes daily, you know. They might skip a day or two. And… and then, oh yes, then there was this thing about that I hated the school so much, in a way my Mum helped me to survive, because or my Dad even sometimes, because what I would do is, you know, I would ask them for days off, and they’d give me a letter saying I was sick literally. But really, they should have really, you know, done more than that. They should have tried to figure out what to do, which is better then, you know, me pretending to be sick, and then I had asthma. Once you had asthma, you know how to pretend to have an attack [cough]. And I used to do that as well. So I used to sort of do the three day working week [laughs]. Yes, I was just thinking about something in politics about the three day working week. That once existed I used to do this three day school week or something. So I think I must have missed, huge, masses amounts at school. But that helped me to survive, because I just wonder really I might haveI remember at times, actually sometimes just crying about the bullying, when it was getting really too much.

Well… it was just I don’t know my parents like, you know, were sort of were not in a very happy relationship, you know, and… there was kind of always sort of fights and arguments and stuff like that and like to be fair I tried to sort of spend as much time away from home as possible so I remember kind of like, you know, always kind of doing things like, you know, outside activities like being away but it took up quite a lot of energy as well. But I, you know, yes like I spent a lot of time outside of the sort of house like I didn’t, I didn’t ever really look forward to coming back there and stuff. I blotted quite a lot, it’s almost like memory wise, I blocked quite a lot of it out and then it would sort of like come back sometimes but like yes like my parents were quite sort of, you know, like violent towards each other but it was more also just kind of, I mean they would, they’d sort of fight over sort of everything pretty much and like and that would be inside and outside the home as well so it would be quite public sometimes as well.

I just found life difficult as an adolescent. I had a horrible time, which was so lonely. Didn’t really have friends. I hated school. Just couldn’t find a comfortable way of living. that just didn’t go away. So at the weekends I would spend hours and hours just walking, just, I suppose trying to get away from what was inside me and of course that never works….and I suppose in the end… I just managed to live round it. I really don’t know what was inside me at all that I was trying to get away from… A feeling of black, nothingness. Later the voices. No I really don’t know. Just, just… terribly uncomfortable. I suppose when I was an adolescent, I always just thought, oh I’m one of those kids that’s just, gets it worst than most. And I think my parents regarded it as just really bad teenage tantrums or teenage angst stuff. And so nobody really was that interested in doing anything about it.

Mental health groups are very safe. And incredibly important when it’s the early days. Because you need all the support you can get. You know, so things like the day treatment. Like being with people where you don’t have to explain, you know, where it’s a read, that’s what you’re there, that’s what you all suffer from. You don’t have to explain anything, you know, people accept you, you know, that’s it. If you don’t want to have a conversation with somebody or it’s too much for you, you can get up and leave. Nobody worries [sniffs]. it’s only in the last eighteen? Eighteen months? That I’ve felt confident enough to join things like a gym. The art group is something very recent and to be quite honest, you know, when they had a good old laugh, at their own expense, probably, if I was honest, I just thought well [blows raspberry] to you lot then. You know, if you’re going to be ignorant, I don’t want to know. And that is paid on… you know, by term, so, you know, if we don’t want to go back. My partner wasn’t there, and I’m really glad he wasn’t, because he would take it personally. And I didn’t. I just thought oh here we go again. What’s so funny? [laughs]. But it is, it’s, you have to be careful, because, you know, one, if you are hearing voices it can, that in itself is very persecutory and then if a member of the public or whoever does say something stupid, it’s not a good thing, and it can really ruin your day. I think, you know, at that point it’s important, to kind of pull your horns in and really concentrate on what’s going on for you at that moment, and deal with it. People are stupid sometimes. You know, the public as a whole can be fairly daft. It doesn’t mean that they know anything about you as a person, or that it is directed at you as a person. You’ll think that’s really important. And I think particularly when you’re young, particularly if you’re a teenager or in you twenties there’s so much that you think you have to do and so much that you to live up to and so much you think you’re going to be and want to have, and half of it you’re not going to get, you know, you’ll just beat yourself over the head, trying to do it. And that I think is one of the nice things about being a little bit older is that you don’t have to do that any more.

I still wasn’t handling my parents coming to see me at all, because it just made me feel worse, just made me feel like I was just how much I was distressing them you know in a way and I still didn’t know how to deal with them at all. So I still, I put up a bit of a wall, I tried to tell them like… I kind of felt that every time I’d start to feel a bit better they’d come and it would just set me straight back, you know, so any kind of progress I was making would just be completely like, just vanish. and so I tried to write to them to sort of say, you know I need to get better; I can’t do this with having contact with you I’ve got to do this on my own. My dad kind of took that, kind of, my mum totally didn’t was just angry you know, I don’t know felt rejected again.

And I got in touch with Rethink. And they were brilliant. I mean at that point they were the National Schizophrenia Fellowship. And, they got one of the ladies from the local carers group round to see my Mum. And she had a son with schizophrenia and she just sat and talked to Mum and just really let her know that life did not stop just because you have a relation with a severe mental illness. And that was a life saver. It was an absolute life saver, because, I mean, relations between myself and my Mum really had become deteriorated to the point where we were weren’t really talking to each other. Because I could never explain to her [inhales] what was happening. it’s very, very difficult to have to keep going over and over and over what is happening to you. Particularly if it’s a psychosis, because you can’t explain it to somebody else. And if you try, it just makes it even worse. Because there’s so much anxiety involved, and [inhales] if you are psychotic personally what used to happen to me was, I would visually hallucinate. I’d see the world blowing up, you know, it would literally be in flames. I could be watching the television one moment and think it was talking to me, in some incredibly malevolent way. Particularly if there was an actor or actress or something who looked like somebody that I knew. And, I think particularly with too many programmes you get an awful lot of eye contact, you know, so you can think they’re looking at you. The radio, again, if I was ever psychotic I would just have to have complete silence and just completely shut myself off. Which is obviously very distressing for somebody who is caring for you. But what I did, was to find out all I could about the condition that I had and I thought, right I’m going to do something with this and I got a fact sheet from Rethink about schizo-affective disorder and it was brilliant, and I kind of took my courage in both hands and I went along to one of their membership days in [name of place] and I met… some fabulous people. And I got involved and it’s a very useful thing to have done. Well because you meet an awful lot of people who are similar to you, or who have suffered more. And I think it’s always very useful to bring service user’s perspectives to what was essentially a carers organisation, so you can have some kind of [inhales] hopefully, understanding between the two.

I mean it hasn’t gone away. I still have, have the voices. And I still see things, but it’s, to me it has just lost it’s power basically, it’s just an annoyance rather than something that, well it did used to take over my life and nearly killed me actually, but now it’s just, it’s just an annoyance. it’s, you know, a bit like having kind of bunion [laughs]. Yes, a mental bunion that’s it. Rather than you know, feeling like it was it as a cancer. it’s, that’s the difference really.

Drinking like binge drinking then you’re not as in control, your liver later on in life, that’s just going to like just going to be ruined the fact that people like, I personally don’t find that when I drink I get aggressive but it’s not me that I have to worry about it’s other people that are around me drinking who get aggressive and want to fight me or want to fight other people who want to fight the world I don’t know, but it’s a bit like that with like with binge drinking and there’s like definitely a worry but it’s more the health, with me personally it’s more like later on in life what’s my body going to be like. And the weight you put on is the immediate affect like you can see oh look how much you’re putting on, how much weight you’re putting on from drinking that much so you notice the effect almost like in the next week or like whatever well with me personally. But it’s the later on effect that worries me more my actual inside organs are going to be ruined.

So it’s, you know, it’s not, and it impacts on everything. Because everything you’ve got to think of, you’ve got to think can I do that? You know, and don’t stress yourself out too much but then don’t stretch yourself out too little, and you know, it’s getting that balancing act so that you don’t kind of stress and raise up a major, major precursor to it. To be much as you cannot deal with stress because it just, so that everything that you become really guarded and you think I can’t do that because, because that might happen. You know, even like, you know, even good stress, even like going on a holiday somewhere new, you know, I mean it’s not stressful. But then I think oh God, because I can’t take, like I can’t take too much information. That sounds stupid. I get like overloaded really quickly and kind of sometimes when I get overloaded that’s when I get thoughts that aren’t quite true. So it’s kind of thinking how much sort of stimulation I can take and even like a holiday, when you get like lots and lots of new information and lots of new surroundings and stuff. That’s like a good thing, but in some ways it’s a bit of a scary thing, because I’m not sure whether I could take it if I’m not feeling particularly well. If I’m feeling, you know, if I’m having like a good period, yes I can, but if I’m on like, not feeling totally great, then it’s a bit like hm

I had one experience where I drank so much alcohol that I woke up in the morning and I was laying next to a girl and I couldn’t even remember whether we’d had sex or not, so, whether it was protected or unprotected wasn’t even a question it was like, well did I even have sex with this person? So, yeah you, I don’t think, I think you get to that point where you kind of, you don’t know what’s going on, you know, just like the guy in the bin bags, you don’t know whether you’re having, going to have sex or you don’t have sex, you know, you just get into such a mess, I think that’s where I get to that point like I say it’s like what is the point?’ because if I’d have gone out and had a few drinks and kind of gone back with this girl I would have had a much nicer time that waking up in the morning and thinking what happened last night?’ you know? And remembering the girl’s name .

I once tried ketamine which is a horse tranquiliser, at a party, again when I’d had, I was definitely, I think yeah, I had some ecstasy although that had, I hadn’t had much I think I’d had like, a bit, quite a bit earlier on and it had kind of worn off, plus I’d had a few drinks but yes someone recommended that I tried it and I thought well I’ll give it a shot’  didn’t enjoy it just felt very sick, very nauseous, just yeah I, I think it just didn’t mix very well with either myself or, on the culmination of, yeah the fact that I had already had ecstasy and alcohol, felt a bit sick, was ill and then lay down, yeah went to sleep and kind of slept it off just felt pretty rubbish I never tried it again after that so.

What happened was for the past year or so I have been going to town, out clubbing and stuff like that, I spend the night out, most of the time to be fair when I go out I don’t end up waking up in my own bed. I know it sounds really bad  but it’s just the whole alcohol thing, I get to the point where I am so drunk I don’t know what I am doing, or where I am going, or where I am, and now I know I have let my limits, like I went out on Saturday, I got drunk, but I’m, I was drunk to the point where I could get myself home and do stuff, usually I would get so drunk, and I have had my drinks spiked a couple of times. When I fell pregnant it was a one night stand with a boy I knew, and we went back to his, he was a lot more drunker than me but I was still very drunk, and, I don’t know why I did it, it just didn’t click in my head that I would be pregnant, I didn’t think I would get pregnant because it hadn’t have happened before. And says to me now, I haven’t got a child. The whole reason why I would say be careful is because girls who drink will get themselves in a situation where they might not be strong enough to cope, a bit like I wasn’t, I got myself pregnant through drinking I didn’t know what I was doing, and I found out I was pregnant and when I  found out I went out and got absolutely trolleyed, I went into town and got absolutely out of my face, and I did that was my way of coping with it I buried my head in the sand, and I did that until my, I did that until I was about two months, then I went to the Doctors at about nine weeks or something like that, it was about eight weeks, and they said to me, What do you want to do? And I said, I need to get rid of it because I can’t, none of my family will know, I haven’t got a place to live. I went to an Abortion Clinic, they put the tablets in front of me, I couldn’t do it, so from that point onwards I got a Teenage Support Worker involved, she was offering me all these places to go and stuff like that. I didn’t answer my phone to nobody, I didn’t talk to nobody, I kept my head in the sand and I didn’t know what to do.

Disappointed, I remember it at the time I thoughtoh this was not, not how it should be’ and, it actually made me feel quite sad and like I say like I started to get a bit of a reputation and then if I would go to school people would know about it like through different boys or different people they know, because I went to a girls school, we obviously used to break out of the girls school to go and see the boys at like the schools nearby and stuff and, it’s, it just, it’s all turned quite sour in, like after I lost my virginity because, you know, before then everyone’s really nice to you, everyone’s like sort of kind of got a bit of respect for you, although they haven’t because they are help, you know they are helping you drink and they are helping you take drugs and you are, you are a lot younger than them, they haven’t in a responsible kind of way, but it did it got a lot, my sort of relationships got a lot worse after I lost my virginity because it was like these people that was hanging around they didn’t have, you know, the boyfriend had turned, all of a sudden, you know, he was out the next night with another girl doing it, the same, and, whereas he had not been like that before and, just, yeah just general sort of, depression at school for everyone knowing about it and having a reputation that early and being called names that early it’s quite adifficult thing to get to move on from.

I don’t think things really improved at school or anything ,probably, you know, in a sense got worse and stuff but I made it through like somehow and I was a nightmare for my teachers I think I guess the pattern again, had already set in by that point and when I was sort of younger I was really quite hard working and stuff but by about 13/14 that just completely got shattered, you know, I just lost interest in sort of doing these things for myself or kind of motivation just went and I didn’t see the point and I was always so distracted and so absorbed and so worried and conscious about what was going to happen later or what was happening, that I wasn’t able to concentrate really at school or take very much in either, you know, you know, I don’t know my head was always elsewhere kind of thing, you know. But I guess when it came down to it I had a reasonably good memory so I would just kind of learn like just cram memorising stuff I suppose cram that in and stuff and somehow kind of like short term memory like you know, like I could sort of do it the night beforehand I would be able to remember it for the next day maybe but then it would go kind of thing and I’d off load it but it was just enough to have for me to kind of get by I suppose . I think that deteriorated with my excessive smoking and stuff but yes well right so

I know, for a risky situation friends, there was eight of us, we went to Ibiza, we finished our A Levels I think it was, and, eight of us all went to Ibiza, and in those six days I’ve never seen more danger, risk taking, absolute mayhem because, the environment, the culture and everything out there was set up for drinking so we all did it and to great kind of lengths, there was a friend of ours found in a pile of dustbin bags, virtually unconscious, not through any attack or anything like that just his sheer amount of alcohol he’d consumed and he was, and there were a lot of for the Spanish in Ibiza a lot of the Spanish gents all stood around him, and you know, whether their intentions were to be good or bad we don’t know, but a couple of our friends that saw what was going on and kind of shooed them away, and virtually kind of rescued him to kind of take him back to the hotel where we could kind of sleep it off kind of thing. But I mean that situation when you look back it’s like well what could have been, you know, he could have, stolen all his possessions, maybe beat him up if they wanted to, and there was nothing he could do about it because of the sheer mess he was in from the amount of alcohol he’d drank. So I mean, and I had the exactly the same on the first night where we’d gone out and in one night I spent a hundred and twenty pounds, now I don’t know what on, how much alcohol, who I’d been buying drinks or what, but all I know was there wasn’t much of my memory they were just snaps, I’ve got snapshots of the whole evening, but at one stage I was, I was just walking down the backstreets of Ibiza looking around and I was just like, I’m in a bad place here, but the next thing I remember, again from the next day, looking back on it, was the next thing I remember was getting back to the hotel, seeing a friend and going back up to the room like and that was it so, I was in such a state that I had only got snapshots of the evening so whilst I’ve kind of think oh I’ve spent a hundred and twenty pounds on alcohol’ it could have been I spent sixty and sixty pound got robbed from me I don’t remember, you know, because of how drunk I was.

And then my, since then my life got better. And I just had to get back on the right track. So my parents put a lot, they’d always put a lot of investment in my career. So they invested a lot of time in me to try and sort out my career. So I think that’s what’s helped. I moved house again. And I moved in with some very nice house mates and that helped. And my Mum also helped me with my appearance. So I had to be taught how to dress well. I had to wash. Stuff like that. I was like a baby again. I had to be parented again. And then the areaSo basically I got my career back on track. I lost another job while I was in recovery, because I was adamant I would go straight back to work, because I’d be, because I lost my job I was off work for a year, while I was ill, before I was diagnosed. So I was just running about the place, like trying to bug friends on their lunch breaks, and stuff like that. Just, God knows what I was doing. I did some work experience, I did a course, stuff like that. But I was just bumming about basically. And when I was getting better I lost another job. And then finally I started contracting which really suits me, because you do short term contracts. And also by that time in my career, I learnt enough skills to hold down a job. Because my career, my chosen career I was sort of launched in at the deep end, because I didn’t do a vocational degree. So it was very difficult for me to concentrate. And some of symptoms are difficulty in concentrating, difficulty in following things through, so all the type of things that you need to be a professional in business. It was very difficult. And yes, the one area that I’m still trying to fix is about relationships, friendships, because when I was ill, I was basically left with no friends. No one wanted to come near me. Everyone either had, I don’t know, thinking about it, may be they had a stigma. I had a stigma because I was concerned about it myself, but I was so worried about being diagnosed and labelled that I didn’t go and get the help that I needed early enough. Because looking back I should have gone to get help, what, ten years before, for depression, but I never did. I never got the help that I needed. And I can’t say that for ten years I was suffering, because I wasn’t. I having the time of my life, but I was being reckless, I was overspending, just things like that. And, people who knew me slowly drifted away, and I was not making new friends. So when I was actually diagnosed, I was, basically had no like [inhales] now, I see myself, I’m back to where I was before, but I’m much more wise, I’m much self reliant, and have confidence in myself, but I think I’ve got this ideology that friends let you down. Because when I needed them most, at my time of, my hour of need, no one was there for me. But my family was there for me, but no one else was, and yeah that was really difficult.

Well, you know, just drinking too much, you know you’re just, you’re sick, it’s, that’s just nasty, and even if it’s not you and it’s a friend, it’s just you don’t like seeing your friends like that and it’s worrying, and you don’t know if you want to go to hospital with them, I mean I’ve had friends that have been, when we were fifteen, they’ve gone to hospital to have their stomach pumped and, I know , it’s, and it’s, it’s not fun, and it’s nothing to do with bad, well, you know, I would say personally being on this side of it, it doesn’t seem to be anyone in particular due to bad parenting or, you know, anything like that, it’s just, the culture of it at the moment, the culture of being a young person is this, this, this drinking and this, you know, joining in and you know if you do it sensibly, I don’t necessarily think that it’s a terrible thing, but it’s just that, I think it’s not sensible, a few too many times and there’s been a few too many people in the corner of the club throwing up and, yeah you do worry about your friends because if they take it too far it’s, you know, it’s not, it’s not nice so it’s quite scary because you don’t know what’s going to happen to them, really. I’ve been unlucky enough to know someone that was in a car accident because of drinking and if, a girl was killed in fact so, as a, like, as a young, she wasn’t a close friend but I know people that were very, very close to the girl that was killed and, it’s not something you want anyone to go through, at all, and you can’t help but think, I mean to be honest she should, she was drinking and driving you know that’s not, everyone knows that it’s not okay, so, it’s difficult when it gets to the other extreme things can go very wrong and it’s just tragic, absolutely tragic .

Oh it’s so precious. It is such a precious thing. Recovery to me means that I don’t have overwhelming symptoms. That I’m able to function. Recovery to me means that I’m in the community and not in hospital. You know when I am in hospital I am desperately unwell. And anything, that is better than that, is recovery as far as I’m concerned. I don’t have, what some people would regard as a full life. I have a happy life, even though I haven’t got two beans to rub together, but, you know, that’s the way it goes. And that’s it. I mean I can’t work but it doesn’t mean that I don’t have fulfilled or useful life, and that’s taken me a long time to accept and come to terms with and I think since I have done that, you know, I’m not going to change the world on my own. I’m not going to have a high powered job. I’m probably not going to have any job of any description, but what I do have is a wealth of experience. It may not be in an area that is to everybody’s taste, but you know, it, it can be useful. And, and it has been incredibly useful in helping my partner. And I did find, you know, having access to Rethink, just that incredible relief of knowing that you are not on your own, you know, that there are thousands and thousands of people who suffer the same way. Yes. And I think also, I mean recovery means you have to take some practical steps. I mean on the news I will listen to a bulletin any day, rather than reading the newspaper, watching the news, and keeping in current affairs, because basically it’s the same old, same old thing. You know, and as you get older you do kind of realise that. You know, the world turns [laughs]. And we’ve seen it all before. You know. And try not to get too worried about it. Because I think one of the very common things with anxiety in particular, is awfulisation, catastrophisation, where you think that the worst is going to happen. And that just isn’t going to happen, you know, it’s not going[intake of breath]. Mindfulness has been very, very useful. Because what I find happens to me particularly if I’m stressed is this constant whirring for what’s going round and round and round and round in my head, all the time. Getting worse and worse and worse and worse and it fuels anxiety and to the point where you can begin to feel physically quite uncomfortable, and its learning what the cut off point is, you know, beyond which you are not going to go, and you put a stop on it, and that’s been really, really excellent. Yes. And I think the other thing as well is, realising that as you do get older, you do get stronger. Your resilience against it does grow as time goes on. Particularly if you’re fortunate enough to have periods of time when you are not psychotic. It doesn’t mean that you won’t have the symptoms of anxiety or depression or the huger mood swings that you can get. But that becomes within the bounds of what is normal for you. And it becomes acceptable and I think the more you can find out about the condition you have, the more you understand it, and the less frightening it is. And I would recommend organisations like Rethink. They have some fantastic information. Because sometimes, you know, the medical profession, they don’t know everything. You know, they don’t. And the psychiatrist will be well versed in medication and another nurse will be well versed in talking therapies. So this kind of thing. What you need is a kind of broad spectrum approach, and just grab anything that’s going. Yes.

So we’d been drinking continuous since about midday about 12 o’clock. We went on a coach so we were given alcohol as soon as we got on the coach and then it was a free bar all day at the races. I think. No it wasn’t that day. Well I did a few bets and things like that at the races but then we arrived back to city. Went, continued drinking at a bar and then a friend called, a mutual friend of mine and someone else who I was working with and we decided we’d go back to my place. We were going to smoke some cannabis and we were going to play some video games. Now one of my friends actually, the guy at, my colleague actually at the time he got a call from a girl who wanted him to go visit her. So he went to see her and me and the other guy set off in a taxi. And then we arrived where I lived at the time and we got out. And then for whatever reason I, this, this bit I can’t, I can’t actually remember but for some reason anyway I got into an argument with one of the neighbours. And then I went in the house anyway and the, the friend of mine who I’d met at the time he was a lot younger than me, he was probably about 4 years younger than me so I was about 22. He was maybe about 18. Now he I had an air rifle and he always wanted to play with it. A lot of the younger guys who came around they wanted to play with it. I don’t know maybe a bit excited by it. I mean. And then he was pointing out of the door which, not. Under the influence of alcohol. If I wasn’t under the influence of alcohol I would never let someone point an air rifle out of my door. I’m not that sort of irresponsible sort of. But the neighbour who I’d previously argued with thought that he was trying to shoot their windows. So further arguments ensued at which point It ended for whatever reason. And I’d gone in the house but then for whatever reason those neighbours that I’d argued with had called some friends or actually one of the neighbour’s parents. So there was six guys at my door and they were trying to kick the door in. I lived in a back-back house. I couldn’t go out of the back so I picked up a weapon and chased them off, an iron bar. At which point the police had already been phoned because of the earlier commotion. Police came into the street. I had an iron bar in my hands. That’s an offensive weapons charge.

I change, I go more, I am quite a loud person anyway but I go even louder, I am more outspoken then. , I am a bit more confident in myself, and, I am, I don’t, I don’t actually know how I would describe myself how I change, I think you would have to ask someone else that. But I can see personally I change into a bit of a, promiscuous girl I think and that’s not good, that’s why I don’t like drinking . I can become aggressive yeah, when I am, I am gobby when I am drinking, if someone says something to me I will, I will rare back at someone when I am sober but it might be someone that when I am sober I won’t rare to, but if I have had a few drinks in me I will quite happily, do you know what I mean? Have a go at them.

I’ve also my judgement’s been off and I’ve got in cars more than once with people who have been drinking and not realised or not been aware or thought about it because it’s not me doing the driving. I’d not really thought about this other person who is taking me home who, has also been drinking. I’ve been horrified the next day to find out that they have but I’ve never thought to ask. I’ve also cycled into a cobweb and fallen off my bike because my judgement obviously wasn’t quite there and as I hit the cobweb I reacted and damaged all my arm, really hurt my arm. So the classic drunken antics that people get up to. And I have a weak ankle that sometimes likes to give way if I’ve had too much to drink .

I’ve yeah, I’ve never gone out or gone away with people I don’t know. I have a friend who she often makes very bad decisions when she’s been drinking. And she doesn’t eat a lot either so she drinks, gets drunk very quickly and there are times when she has been attacked in the street when she’s been on her own. And that’s not just men, she was attacked once by two girls that had a vendetta of some kind against her. She’s been mugged several times because she goes around on her own in London. And will not listen to any advice but she just continues to put herself at risk. She, she’s lucky that nothing more serious has happened to her.

I mean I’m a bit of a spiritualist now, and I attend a spiritualist church and you can you know, they can listen into your thoughts, and you know, you speak to mediums, you know, that’s how they communicate. And also at first when I was, I was experiencing seeing colours and like images, and my doctor said, Oh they’re hypnogogic images And that really frightened me. You know, I’m possessed. I’m seeing things. Because I had no knowledge of spiritual matters. But then when I get more information from mediums, I know that’s how they get all their information from spirit. From, you know, from being clairaudient, clairvoyant, clairsentient, that’s how they, they get all their information.And, and for me I’ve had good things since 2007 as well as not so good things. And I hardly get any bad stuff now.

I always drink to get paralytic, I never drink just to have a, I always have to get completely and utterly para, like to the point where I can’t remember stuff and I’ve done, put, I’ve ended up in dangerous situations when I was younger either as in talking to men, one of my friends was raped oh I can’t say the place, but one of my friends actually raped, we was all at this park, and we was all para, we was thirteen and fourteen, age group was, and she, we all ended up obviously splitting up and this place where we was is well known for rapes and everything else, so what the hell? Now I would never even step foot near there, do you know what I mean? Let alone walk there when we was out on this park up until about eleven, twelve at night, and we all ended up splitting up and my friend walked off, absolutely para, she was in a short skirt and a man raped her, he took her in a car and he raped her. So that was a very bad experience for all of us because we all kind of felt bad because we was all like we was the last one to see her, and the last people to see her were me and her sister, so obviously you kind of blame yourself for that don’t you? You was like well, if one sentence could have been different she maybe might not have walked off and that might not have happened.

I started crying, and so me, because her sister was with me and her Mum obviously rang her sister and was all, Well who was the last one, person to be with your sister? And we was like, Well it was me and. Like me and my mate and she was just like, Well she’s been raped. And because she’d told her Mum and ran out the house, she didn’t know what to do obviously I know the details in and out and she was quite scared of some of the things that, well I’m not going to go into detail but, how her body was feeling she knew that something was wrong because her bum was hurting basically and she’d woke up and she was kind of having visions of this and that, and she just thought well what the hell’s happened to me?’ do you see what I mean? Obviously if her bum was hurting, she could smell sex it is that dis, one, at the age of thirteen, like I was still a virgin at the age of thirteen as well, do you see what I mean? Like I was still innocence in a sense weren’t I? So to have my friend, that have happened to her and for her to be saying this, because we went to see her, and she was telling us what she, what, she keep, she kept having this flashbacks of, so and then we were just kind of like we started crying we was like all, we kind of felt all bad because we was last people to see her.

I never felt like I was vulnerable, I never felt, I always, I mean I didn’t, nobody wanted to get drunk and be sick, so as soon as you felt like that was coming you’d think right I better back off’, I always had that switch in my head that would go right no more’ so I was quite self-controlled actually but I did, I would be quite drunk, when I was in the pubs , but I’d be with so many people, there would be a big group of us, some of them would be over eighteen, some of us would be my age so it was, and they were all very nice, we’d all look out for each other so I was actually quite lucky that, well there was no, there was not, it was all very positive, it was not, you know? Yeah.

No, but saying that I remember a couple of times I would walk home, I mean it would be a twenty minute walk home from town and I didn’t ever feel like that was a problem, I would sometimes, I would sometimes walk home on my own, a lot of the times I would have friends but there would be times where, I wouldn’t do that now, I did then, I would walk home on my own, but I was, I never came to any harm it’s a really nice area, , I was never, I was never at risk but I mean I could have been I suppose I never really thought about that at the time but a few years ago I did think gosh that was quite’ I wouldn’t do that now. I didn’t feel at risk and I wasn’t at risk but I mean there’s, I suppose there was a chance, it was, a young girl, drunk, walking home, you know? I don’t actually, I don’t. Luck, very luckily, very luckily, no I haven’t, I haven’t actually, that sounds quite unlikely but I actually haven’t, yeah I’ve never, like again I think it’s down to the area, it’s down to Edinburgh it is quite a nice city. No I haven’t had any personal experiences of close friends having that experience only the things I’ve read about really but no not really.

But I think you’d very rarely take a drug unless you were already drunk and it would be very hard to just be coming in a completely sober state and then take drugs. I don’t think I, I don’t think any one does that. It would be kind of pretty bizarre experience because you would literally just. It would be horrible actually if anything. Do you have any concerns about kind of what they put into these…? You see that’s the thing. I’ve never taken it when I’m sober so when you are drunk these concerns don’t cross your mind. I mean if I was completely sober I wouldn’t even consider taking it but when you’re drunk it’s a less bigger deal which is actually in a way more dangerous because there’s a concoction of chemical substances but you don’t really think about that. Oh yeah when you’re drugged you just tend to think like, Oh what harm can it do. People do it all the time. Whereas if you’re sober you’re like, you may still think, What harm can it do?’ but it’s like I don’t want to do it. We have looked at the pros of drinking alcohol and now we can look at the negative side. It gives you a kind of false sense of… …security that you can do drugs.

Well, as for like the hard drugs, I had an experience when I was in the RAF and I was in the local town having a night out and, you know, it was probably early hours of the morning so by that time I’d had quite a few drinks and I was kind of drunk, and I was, I was in a cubicle and a guy came in and I’m just stood there and it, and like this guy’s come into there, I don’t know how, whether the lock wasn’t working or something, and he came in and he was just like, Oh And he kind of got out some Cocaine, and he was using the back of the toilet for his platform in which to take it and it, I’m so high do you want some? And I was like, No course not You know, (a) it’s on the back of a toilet and obviously, you know, (b) I was in kind of in the RAF which is a more precedenting thing that, you know, my career was on the line if ever I took anything like that. so I was obviously no and kind of dismissed it, but then I walked downstairs to my friends and I said, Can you believe that, you know, that’s, that’s just happened? And now, but I mean I look back now and I reflect on that and I think well what if I wasn’t in the RAF?’ you know, I was drunk kind of, my head’s kind of not really in the right place to be making kind of sensible decisions, so I was kind of like well would I have had I not been in the RAF?’ you know? And I suppose when you, when you look at it like that there’s kids now that maybe aren’t in the RAF and so are, I could maybe see why they fall into that trap and, you know, they’re drunk and having a good time, you, your emotions are high, you’re having fun, why not top it up with someone offering you, you know, some free drugs you know?

it’s just the, you know, if there’s black and white and then say, recovery is white and being ill is black. So it’s a ying and yang, it’s rather than rather a linear thing, more of a ying and a yang, you know, recovery is what you are when you’re not you’re not when you’re not very, you know, when you’re not floridly or badly ill. it’s just you’re still ill, you know, at whatever level of illness it is but you’re not you’re not in a crisis state. You know, you’re in a more manageable state and recovery is also possible with people with schizophrenia. It might take years. You know, I think half of the people who are diagnosed with schizophrenia, it burns itself out. After a certain amount of time and, unfortunately, for some people it deteriorates and gets worse. And for some people it just stays the same. I think it’s about a third of people that it stays the same, a third of people it gets worse. And third of people it just burns itself out. Roughly. So that that that’s also that’s also that’s also recovery I think, yeah.

And I remember like I was drinking there and then, then I went home and I got a taxi home, and I was lucky that the taxi driver was a, like a nice guy because I, I wouldn’t say I had passed out but I was, I don’t remember the taxi ride, sort of coming in and out, you know, because when you’re drunk I think you almost fall asleep. And I got to the point where I sort of looked at the meter and I said, Oh I’m going to have to get out because I don’t have enough money. But luckily enough like the driver was like, It doesn’t matter about the money, you know, you’ve got to make sure you get home safe. And I, that’s I think is quite a rarity because there’s, that at the time I mean being sort of sixteen, seventeen you don’t think about well that taxi driver could have took you anywhere, could have done anything to you, you could have been let out on the street and anything could have happened, because you just think about having the good time, you don’t think about getting home. But lucky enough , you know, I got home safely.

Okay well I personally am quite a talkative person, and I laugh a lot at anything and everything and I think that’s exaggerated when I’ve been drinking, I’m quite confident but  everyone gets more confident, so I’m talkative, I’m loud, I’m chatty , I think but I mean some of the guys get quite aggressive, or grumpy, or irritating I mean they’re close friends so, yeah love them to bits but some of them do, are very annoying drunk people and in a club guys get more aggressive, a fight can be started very easily and usually everyone else, well I don’t know I’ve never been in a club where I felt particularly uncomfortable or in danger, but I think people are more aggressive and a fight can be started more easily when people have been drinking. And my girlfriends there’s the, there’s the crying drunk person, maybe if they’re have had a hard day or if they’ve just broken up with their boyfriend or whatever it is , they, there will be a girl sitting in the corner of the toilets, the girls toilets crying, in a mess, but then it’s almost, it’s almost really nice because then a girl you’ve never met before, you know, you’ll see her crying and you’ll be like, Are you okay?. And everyone’s, you know, being really friendly and nice, there’s this general help each other out attitude if you see someone upset or if you see someone too drunk you, you tend to see people helping them or, you know, you go over and you’re like, Are you okay? Can I do anything? people, and depending,  they will each other out if someone’s really upset everyone gets friendlier so that tends to be okay, the guys get, yeah, guys can get more aggressive but funny, I don’t know it’s just, it depends on the day, it depends on the people you’ve got around, and I just get very talkative and loud .

Well it’s like, it’s an illness that’s, I’ve been told it’s an illness, well I know it’s an illness, but I can’t see any cure but it can be controlled, it’s the controlling of it which is the important thing I think. You never get rid of it, it’s like you have a scar there even if it’s, you sort of control it, you always have some sort of, how should I say something that’s, if you take away the medication or take way certain things it’s going to come back, you know, so, that’s something you have to live with.

I have logic, I still keep my logic but your thought processes to, roll into one. it’s like you’re thinking something and then something will roll over into your other thoughts and then you sort of get muddled. That happens for some time as well and I was working so I wasn’t all that well so I have a miller turner type work. one time I can remember at the mill, in, I had to come away from it, I was on, not this medication other medication and my thoughts just seemed like it’s rolling, the thoughts seemed to be rolling in my head. And it was as if you lost concentration basically and you’re sure you think something and then something else comes into your mind and it’s, it’s nothing about hearing things mind you this is different, it annoys yourself because you’re trying to think something and it’s not coming through and something else rolls over on it. So that’s a weird feeling. All that is controlled now.

I think, recovery is a very unfortunate word. I wish they’d chosen a different word because it causes such offence to people who don’t believe they will ever, if you like, get better again and there’s a misinterpretation about what recovery means. I think what is inspiring is saying that we all have our own journey to make and our own interpretation to make about what illness is. I think that’s really, really good. That’s liberating and allows us, especially with unconventional thoughts to feel secure in our thoughts and have then seen as valid and to look at our strengths and what we can bring to the world instead of looking always at the failure and the impairment is really good. Where I think it goes wrong is that it sometimes substitutes itself as being the voice for all users. Which I think is wrong. I don’t think it is and sometimes I think it becomes almost, almost a religion. If you don’t belief in recovery then you’re just misguided. You can’t have a valid disagreement with recovery. Everyone in mental health has to believe in recovery. But in many ways it’s a very diffuse subject. When you start talking about the recovery model of the design of a building you’re being really stupid because it just means what improves mental health and just saying recovery model is just rubbish. And there are too many people have a value base around recovery that says the only way to recovery is certain models like getting into employment or believing in this or being free of medication or whatever, which is a judgmental, patronising way of saying people should speak. There are people who have hardened themselves. What I think is wonderful about people with mental health problems speaking out is that we have a vast range of opinions and all of them are valid. From those people who believe medication and ECT is a life saving vital treatment to those people who believing sectioning is the greatest infringement of human rights, and there’s a vitality and breadth of wonderfulness is every one expressing those things which is great. And sometimes people who are caught in recovery think that there’s one way of thinking and if you don’t think that way, then you’re misguided, you haven’t educated yourself enough and if you just listen to the disciples of recovery you would have a guided sensible view. And that I find is really offensive. What I think is wonderful is giving that belief into people having a sense of their own journey and a sense of their own strength and a sense of their own worth. That’s, that’s where it should settle. Rather than thinking it’s concerned with everything else. And I think, you know, when services start talking about recovery focus that’s fine. But often it’s just a bit of a gloss. And everyone says, recovery, they say recovery without even thinking what it means sometimes. I found that quite offensive, because it’s just taken over. it’s become, I hate the word political correctness because it’s such a stupid thing, but it’s become a dogma and that’s really, really annoying because it’s a wonderful, wonderful liberating concept which is in danger of distorting voices and not voices to be heard, just in case they don’t agree with the concept.

To be honest, honest with you Laura I don’t get involved in that much in recovery because I think its wrong why are we telling people how to recover? That’s, and it, it’s a bone of contention with me, it’s fantastic that people are recovering but, as a society, we don’t learn from history and if you don’t learn from history you will never progress. And what my argument is man has recovered from all sorts of things since he walked this planet, how? Because man has got a capacity to recover what he needs is love and compassion and guidance, we don’t need tools for recovery, we don’t need models for recovery, if somebody had a model for recovery, oh my God what a waste of time, or you don’t fit this model so it’s your fault you’re not recovering, you’re drug resistant, you’re non-compliant, you’re not trying because this model works we’ve done it on forty people, come on, how many people go to the Mental Health Services and I think the problem is, because man has always recovered, by it’s own capacity to recover, we’re turning recovery into a science it has been hijacked by the services, this is why we’ve got to do it, this is measured outcomes, crap absolute waste of time, but it’s good that people are focussing on recovery, that’s the positive thing, but to me I have a framework and this is what I work with clients in Denmark with and the, a framework is something that has to be , adaptable, can bend and bow to suit everyone’s needs. Now if you want to work on something so that people can see the recovery scrap your models it’s a square peg round hole, I think. But what I use is I was a tree, but the tree’s symbolic, now the roots are safe housing, if someone is not safe you will not recover, it is an impossibility seventy percent of the homeless are mentally ill and we have to look at why that is, because we have dumping grounds for the mentally ill, we discharge them from acute services, maybe blunted in expression, acting bizarre, like a bit unkempt and we’ve put them on crap housing estates and people think it’s funny to take the piss, they call them names, they throw things at them, they draw on, draw on the windows, put dog shite through the letterbox, I know because I was that person I don’t care how good a therapist is, you can work with a person, you send them back to that environment you’re wasting your time, it’s the government issue that has got to be addressed, it’s an international crisis what is happening with the mentally ill. So we have to start with safe housing, and then, especially around paranoia and hearing voices, I know recovery’s a big thing it encompasses a lot of things but I’m just focussing on those two. I see the trunk as being the trunk support, now what will I will say to someone is let’s look at who you can use outside the statutory and voluntary sector’ because you can’t possibly rely on them for the rest of your life. So ask them to try and identify two or three people they will identify in a crisis. Then you record them on the trunk, and the branches are about achievable goals, now let’s say someone’s been socially isolated through voices and paranoia for a period of three months, and then you get them to go to the corner shop or into the garden that is their recovery. But I get on the, on the leaf I put the time and the date. And then when you perhaps progress more on, further in their recovery because you can’t define someone’s recovery we put the time and the date, then after a period of twelve months or six months if a person says, My life’s not improving. Yes it is this is where you were, now look at where you are. Well, after that session, each session you have to refers to hold the back, and I, Do you still feel safe? Hasanybody moved in? Have you been victimised? You’ve got to keep checking all the time but it’s good for the worker as well to see. Who sort of say this is how you’ve got to recover after. We’re play a dangerous game, we’re setting people up to fail basically, you know, people, I know there’s people out there they’ll say you can’t be recovered unless you come off your drugs I don’t agree with that, I’m not anti-medication, I think it’s a working tool it won’t cure but if someone goes from twenty milligrams of Olanzapine to five, and they’re happy to stay on that, and live their life on that, why should we define, why should we define that that’s their recovery? It’s the, it should be their definition and what recovery is not telling people.

Oh initially as a child life was quite difficult, [tuts] I had very, very loving parents but we used to have a childminder that would come round on a Friday evening and look after us, and after a period of time I started to experience sick sexual and physical abuse off this woman from the age of five up to about the age of thirteen. I would say about, when I was about seven year old that’s when I first started to hear voices. But the voices were quiet reassuring and, comforting at that time. I never told anybody because there was a, there was a big fear about abuse, I was very, very frightened to mention to anyone. and when I got to about eleven I think it was, the abuse and the voices changed, the abuse got more severe , it got more disgusting, but the problem was in it, in some ways me body responded which said I was enjoying it and it really, really confused me, how could I be enjoying something that I actually hated? And from that point the voices took a sinister turn, one became ten, ten became twenty, and they told me to harm meself and harm other people, and I would do, I would be out assaulting people and nobody could understand me behaviour, even to the point where I tried throwing meself down the stairs, and like a suicide attempt, I just really started to lose control but still never disclosed to anyone. I think the lowest point was probably when I was about thirteen year old but it proved to be a massive turning point as well. This woman had come round mid, mid-week while I was doing me homework and said to me parents, I’ll go and give him hand to do his homework And she had full sex with me, upstairs. And I had this big fear, what if she’s pregnant? I’ll get blamed for this’ and everything else, and obviously it turned out she wasn’t pregnant, but it gave me the courage to say to me parents, I can look after meself, I don’t want thi woman to come round And they agreed, and the interesting thing was once the abuse stopped the voices went away. But it laid repressed and buried, I never told them the bit about the voices or the abuse.

And I think it was about a year into that job, just everything blew up in my face big time. I was seeing things that people say weren’t there. Voices came back big time. I was depressed. Oh it was horrible. It was horrible. And the head technician in my department in the end said to me, You’ve got to see the medical person. So I saw the medical person, who said, You’ve got to see the psychiatrist. In the meantime as well as this was going at work, at home I had gone to the GP and said, Can I have some tranquillizers. I can’t cope And of course she started asking questions and ended up giving me antidepressants, when I actually wanted some Valium. And she had at the same time referred me to a psychiatrist, but I didn’t actually know this. So I saw the psychiatrist. About three days later, took a huge dose of these antidepressants and ended up in a psychiatric ward for the first time.

Even though you know intellectually that it’s there to keep you alive. It doesn’t feel like that. It feels like you’re being controlled and coerced and it’s not as though people do it in a nasty way, you know, the nurse who gives me the injection is always pleasant and she’s very good at giving me it, it doesn’t really hurt very much and the people who say I have to take my medication would be the mental health officer or the psychiatrist in a really nice way, I just don’t want to take it. I feel it pollutes the core of who I am. it’s a very strange feeling, like I feel that being on medication I’m false. And I know everyone says when you’re on medication you know, you’re rational, you’re not full of weird ideas, you can get on with people, you can cope with life. You, well you don’t always sleep, but you do better at sleeping than when you’re not. You look after yourself, but it doesn’t feel like it’s me. It feels like, I’m not an automaton, but just a shadow of what is me, and yet what is me is too horrible to think about. So part of me accepts that I have to take it. I just can’t willingly do it.

And I know in particular the injections, you tend to lose your dignity to, I mean you do to an extent in a psychiatric ward anyway, although it’s not going to be as bad as prison. But yes, the injections, sometimes you, you know, you do tend to feel that you’re not in control at all, but yes. I mean, now, I have no problems, no problems about taking my medication at all. But, at some points in the past I’ve been very suspicious of it and that you know, sort of, so I’ve not taken as much as I should, or, you know, completely ignored something. Although it’s happened the other way around, where I’ve been discharged or sent home on weekend leave without any medication. And become physically quite ill, and that, and you know, had to ferry myself back in and that to get something back in my system. Yes.

Well I was, oh let me think. I was, yes, in [place] I actually thought my heart was going to stop when I was just so terrified. So I flee to A & E and I was getting a commentary and they were telling me all about psychiatric drugs, and I didn’t even know what they were at that point. I found out later, all the names that they’d and they said, You’re going to have an aortic aneurysm. You know, [tch] and I was only a young thing [laughs]. I was only in my twen twenties, 27, yeah. And so I fled. And nobody came to help me in A & E. They just put me in a room and left me there and I was so distressed that I thought, right I’ve got to get up to [place] So I was quite a way away and I walked like two or three miles to the train station. And it was in the middle of the night, so none of trains were running. So I got a, taxi which was something like £180 to [place]. Got to my brothers. And when I was in my brothers he popped out to the shopping earlier in the morning. It was morning by then, and his answer phone came on and he gave his normal message and then he actually left a message as well and said, There’s a gun in the third drawer down in the bedroom drawers. You know. And then a couple of minutes later, the answer phone went off again and gave his whole message, and then another message, There’s some razor blades in the bathroom cupboard. And so then when he came back from the shop I said, You know, that you’ve left some, why did you leave those messages on the answer phone? And he went to check it and he said, Well, there’s, nobody’s left any messages. So this was all my It shows how powerful, they can actually imitate an answer phone machine in a very psychotic state. So of course I didn’t trust him at all. He was, he was out to get me and he just left two messages. I didn’t know it was, I wouldn’t have thought that was possible to come from inside your head. And to actually hear an answer phone. And so I thought I had to escape. And that’s when I escaped. And you know, made a, booked into a hotel and made a suicide attempt. It’s quite important to say I did not want to die but at the time I was extremely distressed and just wanted to be released from the voice as my mind was being tortured. Which didn’t quite work out how I’d planned. And the voices were with me, all through that, just goading me on the whole time.

Well like I said I will always be an addict. I have this until my dying day. I have a methodology that I,  which if I use then I can live in god’s grace. I tend to live in god’s grace. There are some mornings because I am such an addict that I just don’t do that and I engage in these addictive behaviours. Now I can’t tell you why because if I told you why then I think that I’d have the solution to all of this stuff that we’re talking about. I can’t tell you why but I think I can illustrate it with this story from my drinking days which kind of does it quite nicely. Was that I got a job in university in my second year. And I’d been searching around, money was tight and I finally got this job and I was very happy to get the job and I shouldn’t have got the job. It meant me starting at 7 o’clock in the morning and I talked to the guy and I kind of forced him into it. You know I was so forceful, I was so charming and persuading, most alcoholics are, that he gave me the keys and told me, Look you’ve got to open up at 7. It was a little shop. You know open up at 7. I said,  Brilliant got the job. Walked home, a nice sunny evening. Everything was right with the world. Everything is fine. Everything is fine. I’m going, I’m turning into my street. Everything is fine. Everything is fine. I get to my front door and the thought occurs in just, less than half a second, Oh you’ve done so well today. You really deserve, you really deserve a drink. The next moment I’m waking up. I open the curtains. Bright light is streaming in. I look down at my mobile. It’s 11’00 am. I’m supposed to be there at 7’00. All of that hinged on that thought, that twisted alcoholic perception, that that single thought had been at the core of most of my problems in my life is because of that thought.

I’d done this thing which will remain nameless. I woke up on the morning of the 28th January and it was a beautiful winter’s morning. There was ice on the ground outside, clear blue skies, sun streaming in. My life had never been lower than it had been on that night. I was surrounded by empty cans of Strongbow in this shitty little room in . I came downstairs and I felt absolutely wonderful. I just felt wonderful. I didn’t know why I felt wonderful. I didn’t know what was going on for me. I just felt a huge sense of release. I looked out into the sky and I said to myself, I’m an alcoholic. And for the first time – I’d suspected for 3 years prior to that that I was – but for the first time there was no dissenting voice in the back of my mind. I went and sat down at the desk. There was some stranger sleeping on the sofa in the front room who I didn’t know and I said to him, I think I’ve got to stop drinking. And he was like, Yeah I think that sounds like a good idea. I took a sip from a can of Carlsberg that was lying on the desk and that’s the last drink of alcohol I’ve ever had. That was the 28th January 2006.

Well I think that if there’s one thing. If I look back on the last four and a bit years and say, and look at it and think, Oh well it’s all bollocks’, you know, God’s not real. You just gave up because you wanted to give up. You grew up. All of this stuff I’d still think it’s all been worth it for the fact that I no longer make my mother cry, all of it. Every AA meeting that I’ve been to, every. Because I used to make her cry a lot and I don’t do that anymore. And do you know how valuable that is to me?

I would say to them, I know it’s really frightening at the moment for you, and you don’t know what’s happening and you know, and it’s affecting everything in your life, you know, the way your family are with you. You know, you’re you know what you want to do with your life. It affects everything. And it, I want, basically what I want to say is that don’t stop having your dreams basically, because if, you know, well what I basically want to say is, it’s going to be hard, your road is harder than it is, you know, for everyone else. But you know, you can still travel to wherever you want to go. it’s just, it’s going to be harder. And they’ll be times you feel like giving up, but you should never give up hope, because you know, I was told that I would end up in Broadmoor or dead, and if I believed that, I would, I would have ended up in Broadmoor or dead, but I chose to believe that I can make something of my life, and this, this, you know, this psychosis or schizophrenia or whatever you want to call it could have taken over my life, but underneath all that there’s.. I’m still Dolly, you know, and I’ve got my dreams, and you know, I’ve got things I want to do with my life. And you shouldn’t let it, you know, it stop your life. You shouldn’t let it stop your dreams. And basically it’s like being, you know, it’s like mountain climbing as well. We have higher mountains to climb than everyone else, but because we are, our mountains are once we reach the top, we are higher than everyone else. We see more, and learn more about being human than anyone else. Well basically what I’m saying is, who wants an easy life, because you don’t well I actually do want an easy life, but if you can’t have an easy life, see the goodness in that fact that you can learn patience, you can learn compassion out of it. You can learn that despite having barriers in your life, you can do anything you want. That’s what I would say.

I well I woke up and the room was full of my own vomit and excrement….There was a guy, a guy from Pakistan I remember who took me down to the front desk. The ambulance showed up. I went with them to hospital. They gave me some, I mean I presume it was Diazepam or something like that. That kind of, that really sort of numbed me. I lay in bed. I slept, slept. Didn’t want to eat, threw up a bit, threw up some more, slept, drank lots of water, slept, vomited. They took me outside for some coffee and cigarettes. There was a guy from I think it was Nightline the university run this helpline. He was there and he talked to me for a bit. And then there was a counsellor just after that. They gave me some food that night, soup I think. I woke up the following morning just sweating and it was like having very bad flu for a day. I took some more Diazepam the following day  and then maybe codeine as well….The following morning they let me out.

I don’t think it will solve the problem but I think the people who do drugs socially will be able to do them and I think that addicts will get help quicker if the government controlled it all. But I don’t see, I just don’t. If someone can explain to me what the problem with MDMA is then I’d love to hear it. I mean I’m talking about social drug users using MDMA. I mean what’s the problem with that. Well I mean it’s addictive to people who are drug addicts but for most people who don’t have an addictive thing, gene or whatever the fuck this is, it’s a good night out. It’s not. I just hate the way that governments have criminalised this. I mean if you really want to make something illegal how about cigarettes. How many people have died because of cigarettes? More than both the fucking World Wars put together. Malcolm McKlaren last night, cigarettes. George Harrison, killed one of the fucking Beatles, cigarettes. You know if you want to make something illegal, make cigarettes illegal but not after this interview because I will need to smoke after this.

Why do you think it (bulimia) was worse for you or made you feel worse than anorexia or restricting? I think because when you arewell, I think several reasons. Because my whole my whole thing is about control, you know. It still is and it probably always will be. I like to be in control and this was not in control. This was disgusting, out of control. I, even though my whole anorexia thing wasn’t about being thin, the fact that I started to feel very disgusting and actually, started to feel a lot worse about my body. And also, I think it was hard, inside I was really sort of crumbling and quite distressed and quite like psychologically still having a lot of issues. But everyone else thought, Oh, she’s done so well. She beat anorexia. Gosh, she’s, you know, this case casebook, you know. She’s done such a great job with the anorexia And they didn’t realise what was going on behind the scenes as it were. And I really and it wasn’t and because it sort of, it felt quite disgusting and quite greedy. It wasn’t something I wanted I felt comfortable talking about, whereas anorexia, you know, you’re not eating. it’s not good but it’s not you’re not sort of over indulging and, yeah.

I first started losing weight when I was thirteen and I remember it very well. I was on holiday, we were on holiday in Switzerland visiting friends, and I remember saying to myself, Now when I get back from my holiday, I’m going to lose some weight So I did that because I was, I was quite, you know, a chubby child so I had weight to lose without anybody noticing, and when I first started losing weight people just thought I was losing my puppy fat and thought nothing of it, and it wasn’t until, it just spiralled out of control really and I became very driven and very determined just to keep losing weight, and eat as little as possible and exercise as much as possible. And it was when I was fourteen, my sister said to my Mum, Do you realise Stephanie hasn’t eaten anything today You know, it came to dinner time, I didn’t want my dinner either and my Mum thought, Neither she ha.

I’m the classic drug addict, alcoholic, nicotine addict, sex addict described in a doctor’s opinion at the beginning of the book of Alcoholics Anonymous. When a drug of choice enters my body several things start to happen and I experienced this the first time I drank alcohol, alcoholically when I was 12 years old. When I take a drink of alcohol into my system it starts up what we describe as the phenomenon of craving which means that I am entirely powerless to stop myself drinking. Now that might be 3 glasses, it might be a 2-day spree. But that started the very, very first time that I drank alcohol. I would never be able to predict how much I would be able to drink. I would never say with any great certainty whether I could stop. That’s the physical effects of my addictions. Alcohol was the first but in time I, god you name it, I’ve been addicted to it ‘ cigarettes which I’m still going through sadly, then later on drugs and also compulsive sexual behaviour. Those are my four big ones really in terms of addictions. When I was 6 or 7 years old long before I’d taken drugs or drank or anything like that I remember standing in the playground when I was a little boy and I felt all of a sudden a sense of profound disconnection from the world and from the little children playing with me. It was almost like a curtain, like an invisible barrier had formed around me and I felt entirely separate from the world. It took me years of misery and active addiction and when I say active addiction I mean drugs and alcohol. And it took me 2 Ω years of recovery to realise that that thing, that weird sense of disconnection is what we describe in AA as a spiritual malady. I’m disconnected from the world and I need my substance of choice, be it the drink, be it the drugs, be it the sex, cigarettes, whatever to reconnect me. The connection between the two, the spiritual problem and the act of addiction and that took me a long time in sobriety to get a grip on.

I did speak to my doctor about it and they just referred, they just gave me a number I can’t even remember the company off by heart, the line, just to call and talk to if I felt I had any issues there. I don’t think I ever really have actually taken them up on that because I’m, I’m just one of them people that I don’t I mean I hate bothering other people with my problems and issues. I’m happy to sit there and listen to other people’s issues all the time, and help people wherever I can but I hate feeling like I’m a burden on anyone else. And that was always a massive factor to me when seeking help, even when I initially went out to seek help, about the eating disorder or what I was doing to myself, I didn’t really classify it as that. I then didn’t want to become a burden, I didn’t wanna be referred. I didn’t want that to happen. I don’t like that and I think that’s very much me as a person. I don’t like to be, feel like I’m burdening anyone or causing an issue. So the moods, you know, that’s the same thing. I never went further because I didn’t wanna feel like that. But there definitely are mood swings and it’s just linked to how good I feel about myself. Which is then in turn linked to my weight.

She hurts. She doesn’t stand. She’s very old fashioned. She doesn’t stand for any of that nonsense. And literally it doesn’t matter how big or hard you are she will cut you down in the sentence. So I think that’s. Also the fear of disappointment of letting people down that you’ve gone down this road. But the longer you go down that road the worse you’re going to feel for it. If you turn around and say, Hang on I know I’ve done wrong. I’m using. I need help. For you to say those, that, those three sentences then you should be alright and then you can get the help you need and hopefully come out better on the other side.

What I would say is health professionals I would  listen to the young people. Don’t cast opinions when they mention drugs or alcohol, you know, if they’re under 18. Cigarettes as well, saying that Do you smoke?’ Yeah. You immediately get a bad rapport with the doctor. I mean health professionals need, they need to be more lenient and they need to be more open to discuss things. Keep, if you imagine say you’re 15, you’ve just had a really bad trip on acid or whatever and you know, you’re really worried about what it’s done to you. You know you go in, you’re going to be scared. You know you’ve got this big bloke in a suit in front of you with loads of letters after his name and you don’t know. You know what I mean. It’s like you don’t know what’s going to happen if you are going to get in trouble with the police, obviously state the confidentiality thing and just make them feel at ease. Let them have their own time. Don’t rush them. Just really kind of, you know, make sure if even if they can’t talk about it have leaflets with organisations numbers on your wall or on the table in front of you or spread out where they can see them. Just, just be patient, I mean, patience be patient with your patient kind of thing.

I started to see a specialist cognitive behavioural therapist who kind of worked through a lot of those issues with me and who I still see now about realising that actually there are other values in life apart from the anorexia that, that shouldn’t be one of your values in life. That there are other things to live for and that actually staying anorexic will have massive disadvantages for the rest of your life, like job prospects, friendship prospects, the time it takes. The sheer time involved in being anorexic is a lot. And so it really sort of made me perk up and think, Wait. I need to, if I’m gonna live as a, if I’m gonna live a successful life what do I want out of my life? And I can’t have the life I want if I stay anorexic And so that has really kind of been a turning point.

I think it really helped me when I was doing it, when I was on the course of therapy. When I finished and I went to university that was quite a lot of changes that were happening in my life and it made it a lot harder to keep using the skills and things that I had learnt, but certainly whilst I was in therapy, and also for a short time afterwards it did kind of reduce certain harmful behaviours cos you have to keep a diary card, a weekly diary card of your emotions and kind of certain behaviours. And those did kind of reduce and the emotions became more balanced. Yeah. And I managed to achieve things that, you know even the simple things like sending back your coffee if it’s not what you ordered for, I would never had the kind of the guts to do that before but DBT kind of gave me the ability to be able to ask for things like that.

When I changed it was, it would go from when I was working at the bookmakers, the bookies. I worked with a, with I wouldn’t say elderly gentleman but he was in his 60s and yeah he liked, he liked a pint. So his break was to go down have a pint, come back. So we would start drinking probably about. He would start drinking at 11’00. I would start drinking at 12’00. So he would have his lunch break at 11’00. I’d have mine at 12’00. He’d go down the pub. I’d go down the pub. A couple of hours later all we fancied was a 15 minute cigarette break which was go and have a pint. So he’d come back. I’d go and have a pint and it would keep going on all afternoon especially if we were doing the eleven/twelve/thirteen-hour shifts. And you know, over the course of a day we would have, at work probably about 8 or 9 pints and we, because it was spread out and we would have food with it, you know, it affected us a little bit but not to an extent that we were falling over. And then, you know, half past nine would come, we’d cash up and then go down the pub for the evening. And then next day start all over again. So, you know, it got the point where there was about 15/20 pints a day. Yeah. Yeah quite a bit.

I was going home man. I would sit up in the shed and have a smoke because I didn’t want to talk to my parents like, you know. I just, I got up at. I’d leave the house and they must have wondered why I was going up the garden all the time. You know what I mean. Because at that time I hadn’t even told them I smoked. And I just completely ignored that situation. And so I’d be going up to the top of the shed like and having a smoke in the shed at night and coming back and, Yeah I’m going to do my homework. Like stumbling, grab a load of food from the kitchen and go upstairs. And my room was a state like I’d. I was losing my temper a lot back then as well. So I was smashing holes in the walls and I had a fish tank and I booted the fish tank, smashed it all over the floor and I think I smashed a guitar over it. And I’d just leave it in there and they wouldn’t come in because they were scared of what I was going to do. So it was, it was just mental and my head wasn’t in, you know,

Going back when I was just smoking weed we’d sort of stay up all night. All, actually no it wasn’t we’d go to the club. When we come out of the club sometimes we’d just go and find it, because I was living with my parents. We’d just go and find somewhere to hang out. So it could be like in an empty school, you know, in the playing field or it could be, you know somewhere where people can’t see us. We’d have a smoke, take some more drugs, might even phone up and get drugs delivered to us, like you know. This could be at 4 o’clock in the morning like, you know what I mean. And it’s just what we did, smoke or smoke. I remember going to the 24-hour garage because we didn’t have no rizlas or fags and that and we couldn’t get no drink. So I ended up like. I had enough money to buy a can of coke so I could make a hop can like, you know what I mean, just anything just to keep us going. And like a lot of people used to go back to people’s houses after the club and that so we’d go with them even if we didn’t know them that well. We’d go around the house and sit up doing drugs until fucking it was time to go home, 6’00 in the morning. Do the walk of shame back through the town and that. You know people looking at you like. You’d got drugs all over your face and that and you’re covered in like stains from your beer and you’d been up all night so your eyes are like that . Then you’ve got to get in past your parents like. That’s always the worst one, trying to get in like. The best way is just to tell them to fuck off and walk up stairs so they think that you’ve had an argument with them. I think by that point we started moving on to skunk and that as well because it was becoming more widely available in our area, like. You know, it was slightly more expensive because we were paying like a tenner for eighth block, like probably a bit less than that sometimes if we knew the kids like, sort of blag them down and that. But yeah like once we started smoking skunk I was like so much better on it. It was worth the extra money and that. And obviously the varieties and that were all different. It was quite hard to keep all my timings together because it’s just. It’s so blurred from what I was doing back then like, you know. And as I get close to present day I’ve got a clearer sort of recollection but back then I was just literally. I must have been stoned every day by that point but by the time I got to my exams.

I’d be yeah, about 16. You know it’s just smoking, smoking constantly like, you know and we, we’d. That’s just what we did like. We’d go out in town and if we didn’t have any block in at home I remember snorting a load of, or hooting sorry, hooting a load of gas because we couldn’t get any smoke like so we got some pressurised lighter gas so we’d be hooting that over the top of a jumper or whatever and just hooting that and it gets you really, really high really quick. We didn’t even think about the fact that it says you can die instantly on the packet or nothing. But…

The most regular thing was the cannabis. I remember smoking a pipe and a couple of bongs before I went into my math’s exam for GCSE. There was like three of us just run offsite and went and had a smoke and went in. And I was so, I was so messed up I couldn’t find my seat when I got into the hall because everyone was already sat down. I was bumping into the seats and that. I never passed that exam and I didn’t pass subsequent exams later on in life as well because I was still stoned out. So my work just went out the window. I didn’t do hardly any work or I’d just go in there stoned and be laid on the desk with my head like on the computer and that. And like we found it was funny to do random things instead of doing the work like. We made up a load of posters and of like animals smoking spliffs and that and stuck it all around the school promoting drugs to people, you know. Proper messed up. Like on Fridays we’d run away and go down to the, like wait to 12 o’clock until the pub opens and then run off and go to the pub man. Have a smoke. We’d be drinking spirits and smoking dope outside and that. I’d have a very different life I think because for a start if I hadn’t of been smoking weed at school I would have probably done better on my exams because I ain’t really intelligent but I ain’t thick like. So I would have probably got enough to give me a better opportunity to carry on. And then I wouldn’t have been smoking weed at the next school so I wouldn’t have got kicked out because that was the reason why I got kicked out the first time from the college because I was smoking weed. I wasn’t doing coursework as I was getting fucked instead of doing anything.

I was first seeing him around maybe April, I can remember having a conversation with him in July, where he was like, This isn’t going to work Because I was convinced that like breakfast, if you had breakfast you would be fat and he was like trying to convince me otherwise. I’m not sure like how effective I think the whole cognitive behaviour therapy thing is because like I said, like I think it’s it makes you, when you’re really, really entrenched in like screwed up thinking and, like with the whole breakfast example like I just didn’t think that no matter what he said to me I was like, No, no. Like breakfast I will get fat. Like these people have no idea These really scathing thoughts like running through my mind. What does he know Like What is that shirt he’s wearing [Laughs].

I was a drug taker and that but I was getting right off my brain like, I’d eat 3 or 4 tablets like in one go and be like eyes rolling in the back of my head and falling around and that. And I thought it was hilarious, what after I thought it was hilarious. I didn’t think it was hilarious like a day later when I’m lying in bed sweating and trying to be sick and basically feeling that I don’t exist anymore like. Do you know what I mean? And proper horrible or on a base’ come down where you’re sort of like trying to have breakfast and you’re putting the cereal in the fridge and the milk in the cupboard like. Do you know what I mean? Just completely shot through it. This was the come down from base’ and ecstasy and did various things. It depends. Like the comedown depended on what you were taking like, you know. Some of the tablets we were getting were cut heavily like you could tell. People were saying they were cut with ketamine. At that time I didn’t really understand what ketamine was. But now I, from experience now I know they had ketamine in it because ecstasy doesn’t make you hallucinate the way I, we were hallucinating off those pills.

it’s horrible to think but I think I’m responsible in a lot of ways for a fair number of my friends taking drugs because I was in there and I was getting involved in it and they were coming like they were coming from where they lived to where I live and coming out for a drink or whatever. And then I’d be like, Do you want some drugs?’ like you know, and I weren’t forcing it on them but it was there and if I hadn’t have been in that situation I wouldn’t have put that on them. And you know, some of the states some of them have got in like. And I got in some states, you know, but I just, I feel responsible, I do. You know, I’d never do that anymore though like but…

Acids does a lot of that yeah. The thing is acid’s emotional it doesn’t just affect your, all your own visual senses. It affects your emotional senses you know. Skunk’s hallucinogenic, THC is hallucinogenic so you get, you know that’s why you see bright colours and music sounds brilliant because you’re hallucinating. Acid is something else. It not only, it really plays with your emotions like you know and if you’re having a good one, you’re having a good one. If you’re having a bad one you have a really bad one. I’ll come onto that incident later like it, if we’ve got and it scared the life out of me.

I was at a party, in fact I helped to organise a, quite a large free party and everything was cool, I was loving it. Taking loads of laughing gas, loads of it, I was selling loads of laughing gas. I was doing loads. I was just doing everything. And then I took some acid. I took too much acid. I asked this guy to stick drops of acid in my eye because I thought it was funny. You know they were selling drops, just putting drops on people’s hands and they were sucking them. I said, No, no, no I know if you can stick vodka in your eye and it gets you pissed, if you stick acid in your eye it’s going to get pissed a lot quicker isn’t it?’ So he put drops in them. He actually put about four in them and that’s a lot of acid. And I was alright for a while and then I started to think people were talking about me and that everyone hated me like. I’d stole somebody’s cider earlier on and it was actually their like land we were using and then I was just like. They’re going to get me now. They’re really upset with me. They’re going to get me. They’re going to get me. And so I decided to walk off. And the weird thing was I heard a story before I left that another guy had left and he was tripping and the police had found him naked in a field. And he’d been arrested and gone to the police station. So that was in the back of my mind, the police are going to get me. They’re, whatever I do don’t get naked in the field otherwise I’m going to get arrested. So I’m trying to find, and these are along long lanes in the middle of like countryside. I’m trying to get back and I’m going the wrong way and I’m going the long way and I don’t know where I’m going. I’ve got to get back and this car is behind me. And I’m up against the hedge as far as I can, like proper as far as I can so the car can get past there’s no problem. This car is behind me and it slowly following me. I didn’t know if the car was there but I, it felt like it. And then drove off and then the car was behind me again. And I’ve got no idea how long it took me to walk the four miles to get home but every step of that way there was somebody there trying to get me or be behind me. I just couldn’t take it and I couldn’t go home because everybody at home was going to know there is something wrong with me and I don’t, I want to go asleep. I don’t feel like I can sleep. I just,  I’ve got. I just need help. So I went to the place that gives me help. I went to the pub. I went to the pub and I’m in the pub crying at the landlady telling her that I need help. And she’s screaming at me telling me I’m a fucking idiot and I need to go home and go to sleep. And I’m saying, No you have to give me beer because beer will help. She goes, No you can’t have any fucking beer. And like she was basically screaming at me and trying to get to get me out of her pub, not in a horrible way just she, she knows that I weren’t right. She didn’t knowwhat I was doing. She knows I weren’t right. She knew I needed help. And I think before that I’d probably been there a couple of times and she’d seen me in particular ways and it was so scary. I said, I’m never going to do acid again.

People have committed suicide because of cannabis and stuff, you know. I don’t think people realise the actual dangers of just that drug. People act like it’s a soft drug and like it’s quite interesting when I talk about it with young people that actually do you realise it’s got the potential to be not a soft drug? I think you know, drugs affect everybody differently. What happened to me might not necessarily happen to the next person but then it might or something different. I’ve seen somebody who took base’ a lot go completely off their head and she, they got locked up for their own good. Do you know what I mean? The more I think about it, this is a really weird experience but the more I think I’ve seen some really crazy shit. A lot of people losing their mind and that’s the thing. It.

Oh god. I wouldn’t know what to say. People automatically think because I’m a drug taker or an ex-drug taker, sorry. Better make that clear, ex-drug taker that I would support the legalisation of drugs. I don’t know if I would. I can see the benefits because obviously there’d be some control over who gets what and how and. But then again people will still get what they want because they can now and it’s illegal. So, you know, I don’t. Before I could say, yes’ or no’ I would have to understand the system that they were going to use in order to do that. I can see the benefits in some ways but then I’ve seen what happens to somebody addicted on heroin and I wouldn’t ever want to do that. If I said it was ok for heroin to be legalised I don’t know if I could live with myself, you know. I’ve seen somebody rob her family completely dry, get them in hundreds of thousands pounds of debt like. Put them, you know. I couldn’t be responsible for doing that to somebody. If I was to like, if we had a vote and I voted yes’ on it I couldn’t do it. But then again selling drugs, you know, if they made acid legal to try once or twice, you know, some people. But some people could go off the deep end on that you know. So like I said, drugs affect different people differently. So I, it would depend on how they were going to police it and to be honest they would never police it. Look at mephedrone that’s a new one isn’t it. Was legal, started to make it illegal now, but people are still buying it and getting it now, you know. When it was legal loads of people were abusing it and now it’s illegal people are still abusing it. So what difference does it make? Do you know what I mean? It’s just although the government would be better off from a tax perspective if they start taxing drugs. It’s like alcohol though, you know, really they should reduce the sales of alcohol actively but they don’t because of the massive amount of tax they’ve got on it. So do we really want them in the same situation with drugs. You know, we’re making a lot of money off drugs so. I don’t know. Sorry it’s a confusing subject for me. I sort of feel, you know, betraying my friends who completely disagree with me like, you know what I mean. And then my new self is sort of saying, you know, you should ban it. But then really  I wouldn’t know. I don’t know.

Once I’d sort of identified what the triggers were it meant that I could really tackle what, what issues I was facing and that just came through a lot of talking but parallel to that was the kind of food side of things. So I had to start writing a food diary of everything I was eating and the ideal was that I would try and add a portion every two weeks. And that could just, it starts with really simple things like just changing from skimmed milk to semi-skimmed milk or like a low fat yoghurt to, to a full fat yoghurt and trying to make the changes kind of small and manageable. I had to choose the changes. So it was always me making the decision, What do you want to start with And it was starting with foods that I still saw as safe but just trying to get me to eat more. And alongside that I had to write down all my negative thoughts I was having. So whenever I was faced with a situation that I thought was difficult or I was getting those negative thoughts coming in, it might have been eating the food, it might have been at a social situation, and then write down the negative thought and then write down what evidence there was for that. So for example, if I was going out for dinner and I put, I don’t want to go out because I think I’m going to get fat. The food’s unhealthy Those, those kind of things I would look at the evidence and say, Well, actually, I’ve never been fat in my life. I’ve been out before and I’ve never put on weight and it’srdquo; So then replacing that with a kind of balanced thought and thinking, Right. it’s okay to go out once in a while and I need food cos I’m underweight So those kinds of things, it’s just rationalising the thoughts and getting my thoughts back in rather than the anorexic. But that was a lot harder at the start. I found it really difficult to do and I didn’t think it was going to work because I found it such a chore and just having to sit and write down and all the negative thoughts I was having, there were so many in a day. So I was constantly writing and just doing the portion as well. Because I was at university I sometimes wouldn’t do it, and knowing that I was going to get weighed every two weeks I would feel guilty if I knew I’d lost weight or I was giving put on weight. You know, if I put on if I went on the scaled and I’d put on the weight I’d be a little bit happy but I’d also feel this enormous guilt but, at the same time, if I’d lost weight I would feel really bad cos I would think, Well, I tried and it didn’t happen. And at the start, I, it went downhill. It was kind of the first couple of months to the April, which was my twenty first birthday, which was when I was at my worst so actually, my weight did drop even with treatment before it could come back up again. I always found it really difficult and just such a chore and I didn’t want to go to my appointments. I didn’t like all the talking and just, I guess I just wanted to give up a bit or I just found it too much hard work and I didn’t want to do the hard work and it really wasn’t until the kind of May that I kind of had a turning point and started, things started changing for me.

I went to art therapy and absolutely refused to do art. I was like, I’m not going in, I can’t do it, I hate art and like [laughs] I was crying and screaming the room down and they made me go in and I hated it, but I learnt from that issue that I have such a great fear of doing things that I’m not good at, you know, I was able to work on, you know, what my fear is and why I’m not able to do things I don’t know and you know, that, from just from that session they set me a lot of tasks and I now, I set works upon just doing simple things that I’d never done before and simple stuff I felt that I was, wasn’t good at and it was really breaking down all the different barriers. So I just, I don’t think there was one thing, I think it was everything put together in that way.

Absolutely awful [laughs]. I hate it; I would never ever want to go again. It was, I don’t know if it’s different everywhere you go but for us, we kind of had an art teacher kind of thing that would set you a task. He’d just be like, OK this is the theme like say some place would have, like he’d show us an Egyptian picture for example and he’d be like so I want you to look at it and think about it, and just draw something which your emotions are telling you to draw. I still to this day, don’t get the point of it; I don’t agree with it, I just, I don’t understand it at all. One day, just to annoy him, I just decided to draw a smiley face with nothing else. I just thought, Well fine, if you’re going to make me do this, this is what I’m going to do I got so frustrated cos then he tried to psycho-analyse it [laughs] so you know, I’d draw this smiley face cos I was really angry and I was just trying to get everyone to leave me alone and [laughs] things like this and I just, I don’t agree with it, but it obviously works for some people, some people find it therapeutic, for me it just made me even more angry, which I didn’t think I was actually and it showed me that I obviously did have anger issues as well that I needed to let out. But as I said I was able to learn something from it and I focused on that instead of [laughs] what he psychoanalysed me to say.

It’s a scary time being away from home and especially when you know you’ve got these emotions, these issues, these problems in your head. You try and have like, you’re trying to overcome them, you’re trying to battle through the like, the voices like of the eating disorder every day and then it’s like, you’re placed into an environment and, you don’t know anyone and you’re forced to eat and, it is scary.

But I had some like the occupational therapists when I was in hospital. I had some sessions with her and we did things about like confidence and being, I think I did something about being assertive but I don’t know why [laughs]. And we did things like we’d think of things that I was scared about and practice like one of the things that I was that really made me panic was choosing. I wouldn’t be able to go to the shops to choose like what to eat. So we’d go out together and I’d have to choose like something. We would go to Starbucks and get like a muffin and a drink and I had to choose it myself and sit and eat it like and not think everyone’s watching me sort of thing. So sometimes if I was with my family, if I had we had like my gran and grandpa and or like aunties and uncles and stuff round or family friends, I just like they were watching me when I ate because of because they knew there was something wrong so they were kind of like watching me. So I had to practice like feeling a bit braver about eating in public and making decisions and eating like a bit of cake or something instead of like your usual apple afternoon snack or something. And just trying to practice getting more of that or getting used to being normal and so that was really good. It was like proper constructive work.

So if I’d actually had the motivation because motivation is one of my biggest problems and the only way that I’ve got motivated now is having something I like, and doing something I like. So we’re like that and that really scares me because the current situation in the country is that opportunities are going. They’re taking away opportunities for jobs. They are taking away opportunities for activities and these young people are smoking weed and they are doing things, you know. And their motivation is going to be down to a minimum. So they are going to start thinking about doing things, you know get a bit of money out, be like that. And it scares the life out of me because the potential for young people getting themselves into states. But it’s not that I’m. I know some people have it a lot worse and that. I didn’t have it. I’m alright I haven’t got a lot of money that but I’ve got somewhere to live and I’ve got stuff and I’ve got by, you know. I’m still alive. I had two friend die on the way to get here, bless them. One was heavily drug related, he killed himself actually. He was getting. Actually I don’t really want to talk about that one.

In the second half of the year, my parents were away one weekend. Two of my friends who had taken Ecstasy pills before had been mentioning MDMA for a while so I decided I wanted to try it. They’d been taking pills since college, but I’d never gone near it. I had friends who used cannabis in high school as well but I didn’t want to take it. I was interested in reading about it, though. There’s a book called Street Drugs. I think it was written 1992, 1993 which is a tome of about 500 pages. It’s written by a drugs worker about all the drugs he had encountered, and the problems they caused but also the history of the drug’s use and where, the properties of the drugs as well. It was pretty balanced illustration of drugs’ positives and negatives. I was quite well versed in drugs, I just didn’t have any particular desire to use them. So it came to halfway through the first year of university near Easter. So we went in for 2 grams of Ecstasy in powder form. I remember the powder being quite novel to them, I think it was when powder MDMA wasn’t so widespread as it is now. The pill market was rubbish at this point, they were really impure. And the powdered MDMA was sold at a reasonable price so we got some and took it when my parents were away.

I’ve only ever actually done one drug. It’s MDMA and the reason I’ve done that is the first time I tried it was long after other people. It was in Year 13 I think. Like the most ridiculous way because someone thought it would be funny to put it in my drink. I mean like really awful, like a friend. Not a close friend but like and then I had, I was. I could tell I was on it and it, I didn’t feel that bad. And then that is literally only the only drug I’ve ever done since and I’ve only really. I did it a few times at university in London but mostly just at the festival because festivals are a time when it’s like, you know you’re not. You know it’s just a, not an excuse but it’s kind of a…

I always struggled with depression. I’ve had some manic spells, some long depressive spells. I don’t struggle so much with feeling bad for long periods of time so much now. In high school and through college I was having a really difficult time being happy. And ecstasy – ecstasy taught me how to manage things. it’s one thing if you’re depressed to think things are probably much better than I assume they ar, but you can’t really see them as being good. That goes even if you logically can see that there’s no reason to feel bad. But with ecstasy, well, you take it when you’re otherwise depressed and you can see everything in a completely different way. You are actually seeing things as a happy person. And that helped to show me that you can see the world in different ways, maybe even control how you see it a bit. I noticed there were triggers that made me start thinking negatively about things, and there was stuff I could do to stop those triggers. Ecstasy for me has been really helpful in showing me how to manage having moodswings, how to deal with getting depressed and getting manically happy. E put you in a place where everything is fine – even bad things. It removes any drama surrounding any issues you have and you can just see them in a rational light. it’s great. I mean apart from that I have learnt to identify triggers which tend to make me think negative thoughts. And… I’ve learnt how to dupe like for example if I’m. Most of the time I was very, very tired for a lot of the time when I was at school. I wasn’t sleeping very well. I mean, you know I had a very bad diet but now I notice if I start to notice the patterns of those thoughts emerging over the course of a day and I tend to go to bed early or I tend to put on a comedy show on the TV or listen to something funny. Like I’ve learnt how to manage things a lot better and that isn’t something that I did before I took ecstasy. And ecstasy did say, it showed me, you know, like the things which you may have anxieties about – you don’t have to have anxieties about them. You know that isn’t an unchangeable part of you. Aging and experiencing more of life has obviously had its part to play but I think E has done a lot for me too.

Just, quite lethargic, just kind of lower, I wouldn’t say kind of depressed as such or anything but, just, the sort of, the low that you get after the high not necessarily always drug related even, if I do something now there’s adrenaline from doing something that, sports-wise, and get the adrenaline afterwards you always kind of get a low after the, after the buzzand it’s probably more, more low than, yeah, because the drug gives you quite a high, you have quite a low afterwards but, I guess the best way I can kind of describe is almost like similar to being sad, you just feel a bit, sad but, not badly, I was aware that you have the low after the high and someone had explained that to me so, I knew that’s what it was and it, and it was probably only the next day and then the, the following day after I was fine, it just what I’d call the, the drug equivalent of a hangover after you, you’ve got drunk and you have a hangover the next day it’s, I’d say it was the kind of the equivalent from having the ecstasy you have the, have the low the next day just, lie around, eat some food, watch some movies and then, yeah the day after that it’d be back to normal

Only while you’re on it though and then, and then till about, some people would say like I don’t know until about well what I’ve experienced when I was enjoying taking it, there’d be a down side, you’d be quite numb the next day you wouldn’t be thinking many thoughts it would be the day after that I would say like Monday when you’d be back at school and you’d be, it would be until maybe about Thursday that you’d be thinking Oh God what am I doing with myself this is really cra and I’m thinking like I’m failing in my course I’m doing thi. And it seems bizarre that it would be worth the buzz and it isn’t after a while, it really isn’t and it kind of because that comedown maybe like when you first start taking it, it kind of like lasts a day or two, or a day and then it gets to like I say to Thursday and then it gets longer and longer and longer the more you take it so after a while that buzz of feeling so euphoric and having like the time of your life yeah but it’s not real though it’s not real happiness like it’s just so synthetic and it’s yes it’s, it’s pretty fake really.

The come down as I found like as time went on like I was at first I would take it with a pinch of salt because naturally like I found I could, I’m a very confident person but drugs bring out such a weakness in me they especially like with mainly pills as in ecstasy and I suppose like doing cocaine to a certain extent, that brings out more anxiety but pills because they reduce your serotonin just like making you feel so unhappy and like looking at life in such a different way like whereas normally I say we were chatting like in a normal conversation I’d just be chatting to you how I am now also in a different light because we wouldn’t be doing this but like I mean I would be chatting to you normally and I’d be listening to what you’ve got to say. But the more, it’s almost like pick out the paranoia and like you have such low self esteem when you’re chatting to people and you’re sort of worrying like Oh God how am I being perceive and in a slightly different way than when, when you smoke skunk. A year of doing like a lot of like MDMA pills and stuff and then it came to, one night in the summer the end of at the end of that sixth form year I went out and I started feeling really horrible like sort of like the first like the comedowns took longer and longer I mean like the way I was feeling I was thinking more inwardly thinking very depressed thoughts and it was such a new thing for me because when I was younger I’d view depression as such a weakness and I’d go, I would just view it as like Well you’re depressed really well so fix up like what’s wrong with you And it’s only until like you start feeling those thoughts you’re actually like Oh this is what it feels lik and…

We had gone to a rave in the town centre with him, and we had got in no problems, nobody asked us for ID because we were like done up to the nines and, I actually took some Ecstasy pills, and I had actually taken too many and, that night when I had taken too many I had really bad reaction to one I like I took, obviously to the amount that I had taken, and I just remember standing there in the middle of this place which, like was, it’s like the Guildhall where now I walk through to pay my bills, so you know, I see this place all the time that they had a rave there back in the day. And I remember just standing there and being really violently sick like, like proper like throwing up green stuff and everything and it was horrible, it was horrible. And like I would look round like and everyone else was the same, everyone was on Ecstasy and it was like kind of the culture of these events, I don’t think they do them anymore, but it was kind of the culture of, everyone done it there and you know, because it was so easily available to me, I mean I perhaps should have stuck with just the one or something and I might have been alright, but it was because my, like my friend’s boyfriend he sold them and so we were, again we didn’t have to pay for anything, I think when you don’t have to pay for stuff it makes it easier to take more of it and, you know, and, I mean he, in terms of like safety in these raves we was always okay because we knew that he would get us home safe and that but, looking back on it now the things we were, like the amount of pills we were putting down our throat it wasn’t a safe amount, in any shape or form, and it, it sort of showed in our health as well, like the being sick and the dizziness and the odd, and one time I was at a flat in the town, after one of these raves and I carried on taking some more pills when I got back to this flat. And I got really compulsive and started like pulling my hair out, like kind of just, like I couldn’t control it, it was like I just kept going like that, like to my hair, I kept fidgeting with it, and the next thing I know I had like clumps of like hair in-between my fingers where I had just been going like that for so long, like a compulsive thing, like we, a shaking of the lip and I will always remember like the next morning your mouth would be so dry and your lips would be in a terrible state because you had just bitten, you know, bit them or, been shaking and the stuff like, from obviously from the effects of Ecstasy and you did, and you obviously you don’t notice all these sort of thing at the time when you’re doing it, and it’s only the next morning and you think gosh’ like what have I done?’ you know and, I didn’t realise I was that bad last night.

And but it’s that, it’s that feeling but like I say but for months and months and months and it’s, what I think it’s more to do it’s like I think it’s the combination of taking like loads of ecstasy and MDMA which are very like sort of related and it’s that weakening of your mind and like and because the more you, the weakening your mind and then when you smoke cannabis you don’t look at the world in that happy light and you don’t look at analysing things and think creative thoughts it’s like the thoughts turn very much inwardly and like you’re, you’re sort of think like it turns around like flip side of everything it’s like there is a negative aspect of everything even if like I don’t know like well you think the worst of every single aspect of your life. But it’s that that brings it out it’s the combination of the two it’s not one or the other.

And I wasn’t allowed, I was on constant obs. I was stuck next to a nurse station. It did, and it did feel like I was being punished for what I’d, what I sort of did at that time. But obviously I was really ill but I felt like I was just doing this to make myself happy. So it was really hard because you know we, when I was in hospital I had to get used to getting nurses to watch me going to the toilet which was pretty hard, you know. And it’s, it’s one thing you know taking away your possessions, you know taking away your book or, your, you know your iPod or whatever, but once you take away your dignity and you’re not allowed to even go to the toilet without somebody watching you, or everything, all your food is recorded and you’re constantly watched, it’s, it’s made me who I am today because it’s, it was just so hard at that time. I remember a couple of times I just broke down completely because I couldn’t believe that my life sort of came to this point. Because it was really hard and I couldn’t talk to anybody at that point either because there was nobody as young as me on the ward. I was, there was no TV or anything like that. And I was basically just trapped around myself and I couldn’t even get off the bed basically. So that first month that I was in hospital was really, really hard for me.

When I started smoking it more regularly? I’d say other than availability there’s nothing pressuring me to do it. I wasn’t, I wasn’t depressed or anything. No I was going through like one of the best times of my life probably actually. I was a lot more confident than I’d ever been. I was doing. I obviously because I’d had issues when I finished school and then gone to the college but I was doing well with my work placement. I had my part-time job at Burger King. So I was quite popular with the girls at college so I was. I was going through a good time in my life really. So no there was no pressure. There was nothing making me smoke.

Yeah just, yeah I just, I don’t know why I just, don’t know, when I was younger I liked to take a, not take a risk I just liked to try something different and I knew it was illegal and I quite like that, that was quite like, quite liked the idea of that, but and I smoked cigarettes so I didn’t think it was going to be much different to be honest. I don’t, don’t know never really thought about it like that, I’ve just more just thought of it being like a, and again like the same maybe relaxing sort of enjoy, I enjoy it, and I don’t know, I don’t really know, different feeling.

I kind of didn’t want help not only did I think that I didn’t need it, or these people couldn’t help me. Or the help that they’re trying to give me doesn’t really apply to me, and it doesn’t work, and they don’t really know that yet. But I was convinced that I was gonna be dead so there was no big point in people even trying to help me, you might as well stop wasting your time. And kind of when I was like you know, I was sectioned? I was like, No so I think from that point I just turned around and said, Okay fine, if I’m gonna live I want to live in a certain way. I don’t want to live like this And alongside that came you know, you kind of break down your wall and you start trusting people and trusting that people can be the ones to help you. And letting them kind of lead the way and I think it all went from there really.

I think, yeah I think it can be, a sort of, yeah like almost, you know, if you’re going out and there’s, if you’re nervous about speaking to someone new, you know like a girl, then yeah you might have a couple just to relax and be a bit more confident, yeah the Dutch courage as they call it yeah, and I think that’s quite, probably quite common amongst, amongst guys, I’ve, I’ve been there myself actually yeah and you know since then, I have been out and there’s, there’s a girl I don’t know and I want to speak to her I’ve had, you know, I’ve had a couple of drinks to think about and build up the courage and, you know, relax a bit more first before, yeah. So I’d say that’s.

I think I was, like when I had, sort of had a proper drink I was probably like fifteen or sixteen which is, later than, than some people at our school, but I mean I was in the group of friends that never really sort of did things like that, but when you got to fifteen or sixteen you soon realised that you were kind of the odd one out because, you know, you didn’t know how much people said were true because you know it was stories that at school, you know, girls say aren’t always true but yeah and they were going and drinking and doing this and that, then all of a sudden the things that you do, though you enjoyed it didn’t seem like it was good enough because you weren’t doing what they were doing.

Yeah you sort of, you felt like, I don’t know I think when you’re a teenager, especially when you’re sort of fourteen and fifteen, sixteen, all you want to do is be like everybody else, that’s all, you know, all you think, you could do, you must dress like them, when I say them I mean like the popular people who would have been like in my school, and  you know, you want to dress like them, you want to be like them, you want to be a, yeah a part of them and so you just go along with it really.

I felt quite numb at that time just simply because my emotions weren’t there at all because I was so exhausted and, and I was dehydrated and just not very well so I didn’t feel much then but it’s when, it’s when the treatments start that it actually gets hard when you have to eat, when you’re faced with fear foods, when you’re faced with weight gain cos I think it was, it was as soon as I gained some weight that, that I really freaked out and at that point had to be sectioned under the Mental Health Act..so.

And I think my parents could see this, and they were so, they really wanted to see me well, and I’m really grateful to have parents like those, and they did research through Beat actually into the kinds of other, like alternative kinds of institutions that you can go into, and they found a private place a private treatment centre for all kinds of addictions and eating disorders and depression and things like that. And it was quite expensive, and I was just like, No, absolutely no way, you’re not paying. That’s not fair. I’m not having you pay anything. That’s ridiculous. Like, I’ll do it myself rather than having you pay. But of course I couldn’t do it myself. But they kept on at me with this idea, and I just thought, They’re not going to give it up. Okay I’ll go for an assessment. And I went for an assessment and for some, for some reason I ended up being admitted a few days after my assessment. And I thought it was crazy, I really did. It was quite, I think it was sort of American influenced, and it was quite happy clappy and that hold hands, and there were all these like big drug addicts like holding hands and praying and stuff. It was like, I was like, Oh my Gosh where am I? Like, I cried on my phone, on the phone to my parents, like, It’s a weird place. They’re all weird here. What am I doing here? This is crazy, in the middle of nowhere. But strangely enough it became the best thing I ever did. And it just changed my whole way of life, and yeah, I mean just the way I think, everything. I learned so much, and I made some amazingly good friends. And I think the most important thing, and the thing that helped me most was the staff because they were just so like caring and so amazing. And they really went out of their way to help. But it’s not like, because at other places that I’ve been to you just know that they’re just doing it to get paid and they’re like Eeergh, when can we go home? I’m just sitting here watching you. But these people you know, a lot of them had first-hand experience of something. Whatever it be, some of them eating disorders. And it was really, it seemed to be their mission in life to, to get people well. And I really appreciate it. So I was only in there for about six weeks, and when I came out I wasn’t there yet, but I was, I had a more positive outlook and I thought to myself, I can do this. But I was still finding it hard.

You see a lot, you see a lot, I think, me and my friend were talking about it the other day. And you see the best in people and you see the worst in the people. And you’re kind of in this position where like you’re pulling like your best friend out of the way of like an on-coming car, or you’re kind of like pinning your other best friend, who’s like your sister against the wall and like taking something off her. But then you’ve got people that are doing, it’s family, you know, and I think you really learn about suffering, and human suffering of that sort and also about kind of, I learnt a lot about myself and the type of person I was, and the type of person I wanted to be. And I got a lot of role models through that, and it did, it was definitely it saved my life on a fundamental level; you know I wouldn’t be here if it wasn’t for them.

Looking back, I mean I’ve discussed this with my Mum quite a few times, and looking back I wish that we had stuck with the NHS. Because, we thought we were making the best decision that we could at the time, but from my experience with the NHS and kind of private, the unit that I went into was quite a new unit, and they didn’t really have any kind of procedures up and running, and also there was, there was an issue with funding after I’d been there for five months, that the health insurance weren’t going to give any more money, and so, and that made me feel awful cos it made me feel like, they only wanted me for their money, and no-one cared about me, and it actually made my mental health deteriorate quite a lot. Cos I like, even though I know that it it’s professionals can’t become too attached to people, it, I do like to think that they care about me and to think that they only were kind of caring for me because it was their job, and because of money, and now they weren’t getting that they didn’t want anything to do with me, was really quite upsetting, and I think also with the NHS all the people that I’ve seen there, all the NHS hospitals I’ve been in have, they’ve had quite a lot of experience in more, I don’t want to use the term severe but that’s kind of what I mean, because people who get help there are usually people that have, are quite seriously ill, whereas in private services it’s maybe less kind of extreme cases that they get and so maybe the experience is there with the NHS. Having said that, I do know people who have found private services better because in the NHS they weren’t getting any treatment so, yeah, but for me that’s how I felt.

What I would do also which kind of, it might sound a bit weird, but while I was in the inpatients’ unit, and the best I could cos I was very drowsy a lot of the time, I would always go to Paperchase and buy me like just a little diary book that I could draw things in about how I was feeling. And then kind of that kind of, when I come out I was looking back at kind of how low I was, cos I’d got the help and that was like, Wow I really was that low And then every day I’d write in how I was feeling, just like a diary. Or what had happened that day. But also like how I was feeling mood wise. And then it would show like a pattern in my moods. But like generally kind of if it was low over a period of like a few weeks, or it was high then I would make sure that I would look back for say like, for the past two weeks every night to see if like it’s, if my mood was changing. And if my mood was like, had the slightest change I would start to kind of do a lot of things to kind of pick myself up more. And I think that was one of the main things that kind of gave me the self, like the self, power of the self, like will power if you like, to kind of be able to kind of move on from being so low, being kind of, having these eating problems. That was also one of the other things cos I could trace back how a lot of people, when they’re a lot low, they don’t know they’re so low in the sense that kind of they’re feeling that low. But so you need to be able to look back at yourself which helps.

Just getting stuff out there, and like other people like, if you’ve got a problem like other people kind of suggest things that you could do to help you. So I find it better than just writing in the diary that’ll just sit in a drawer and I won’t really do anything with. 
And like at first it was kind of completely anonymous, like no-one like didn’t even know what country I was from, so it depends like on how much you want to kind of reveal. So it’s all kind of up to you and like all in your control.

We had the dog which I got, when did I get the dog I got him I think after about a year of seeing, of going to outpatient treatment because I managed to persuade my parents that it would be a really good idea. And he did really help me, he was, he is, and like having, having the dog it was because I already had a cat but I’d always wanted a dog. And we got him as a puppy and that was, he was really good. And like even now, still, because you have all these well at the time there’s like all these people who are making, well not, not intentionally making me feel guilty but, you know, I felt guilty that I was upsetting them but he was always happy and, you know, waggy tail and, so he was great and he was a good help.

It’s about finding resources to kind of deal with it like you mentioned yeah. And finding them resources kind of somehow masks the problem, in the sense that kind of you somehow wean your way off. And I’d say all the little things that I have done, whether it’s blogging, keeping a diary, trying new things, taking medication counselling, psychotherapy. Every single one of them has been like an umbrella, each part has added to the support that I’ve had and each part of that has helped me to develop a new strategy. So for example if I mix the psychotherapy with the diary, the psychotherapy, the diary will enable me to track how I’m doing for a week to week, to a day to day to a year to year like kind of sort of thing. And I can translate that into the psychotherapy which enables me to pinpoint things up, pinpoint things up. So everything, you need to, you need to try as many things which as soon as you start trying new things your confidence will grow and you will feel more confident in doing things. And the one thing, and when your confidence does get knocked, which will happen, it’s about kind of remembering what you did before to pick yourself back up. Which when you’re in that low state you often can’t. So you’ve got to kind of, I’m going back to the diary, but you’ve got to kind of take it day by day again, because it’s like two steps forward one step back. You’re going to get there, but it’s going to be slow cos as with everything when someone’s had a broken leg it takes time to repair and even when they get the cast taken off, it’s often still broken, repairing very slowly, and it’s often still a painful repair but it gets better. And as soon as it is repaired it’s always likely to kind of break again, because it’s already once been broken. But it can always be repaired.

Try to be understanding. Understand where the person’s coming from and why they are doing what they are doing. Understand that whatever trouble may be caused they’re not necessarily doing it just to hurt you but because the drugs have taken hold of them. It’s their addiction. It’s not them it’s their addiction. It’s like Jekyll and Hyde you can have two people in the same body. You can have that person and then that person on drugs, do you get me? And they’re two different people altogether. And again just sit down and talk and get things out in the open really and then take it from there. Try and get advice and help. Things I’ve just said really.

I think a lot of it is down to convincing people to get into treatment and managing that treatment properly because counselling is all well and good but you need something to go along with that. You need proper medical help to go along with that and at the moment as I’ve just said, the funding isn’t available in a lot of places. So people are waiting six, twelve months for that treatment. And obviously in the space of six or twelve months you can be dead, you know, it only takes one dirty hit and you’re dead. So that is not quick enough by any means. And also with heroin especially you can want to give up one day and the next day you want to continue using. So when somebody decides they want to give up they need to get into treatment quickly or else they’re going to change their mind and not be successful or there’s a very good chance they’re not going to be successful anyway.

Not a great deal at first. Things went on as they were at first. It kind of came on slowly. I was taking more and more heroin. Before I knew where I was I was addicted to it and obviously then I needed that to function because of the withdrawal symptoms and what have you. So because of that you take more and it’s a vicious circle if you like. At the time I was working. I lost my job because of it because I couldn’t get up in the morning and go to work. So then I’d lost the money to get my drugs and then I had to turn to crime. I was borrowing money off my Dad all the time, 20/30 quid a day off me Dad. And so he very quickly found out about it. He didn’t kick me out. He didn’t have an argument with me or anything. He just sat me down and chatted to me and, you know, talked to me about it really and found out what the problem was which I opened up to him and everything and told him and he was very understanding but there wasn’t much he could do.

Yeah it is really hard. Because when you’re totally consumed you feel like getting better would make things worse and maybe at the start of recovery it will feel scary and completely out of control and like it’s a lot safer to stay eating disordered and it does feel, yeah you do feel safer to start off with when things are changing, but as the changes kind of are put in place and you get used to them and you kind of make the first few steps, it does get easier. Cos I know when you first start recovery it’s very hard because you have to completely change everything that is your normality. And you have to kind of relearn what is good and kind of normal in healthy terms rather than normal in your kind of world. And although it’s horrible and scary in the short term, in the long term it’s a lot better. And it opens up more doors to you than staying eating disordered and staying kind of ill.

When I was about 14 and 15 years old I started smoking cannabis, not that much at that time but I was smoking it here and there at night after school. During my last year of school I was only doing 3 days a week and I only took English, Math’s, Science and Geography as my GCSE subjects, all of which I got an E grade in. I did no revision and no coursework at all so I was lucky to get that really. And when I finished school I started using a whole lot more cannabis. I was using it all the time and that’s where things started going downhill.

Yeah. I think it just really, it brought me, I don’t know; back down to earth or something. Like it made me realise that your health is just so important, you know it really is your wealth and I think previously I’d kind of just taken it for granted, or not cared, I thought it just doesn’t matter. But it really made me think, you know, it’s, I, anything’s worth, I, I’d go to any lengths just to improve my health. Yeah.

Yeah, yeah totally different life now.  I’ve been to college and I’ve got a girlfriend and a son, totally different life now. Tell me a little bit about your new friends now? I mean where you have met them and? Well to be honest I’m still building relationships as we speak. I haven’t actually got that many friends at the moment. It was only 18 months ago that I got clean so it’s not that long. But I’ve met a few people at college, at work and also it’s been my girlfriend and her family and just build up contacts like that.

At the end of each week my Mum would go through the week with a piece of paper and we’d put down tallies for the challenges that I’d done. And I would be honest and tell her what I’d found challenging during that week. And it pretty much, you could tell by the honesty because otherwise I’d get to the next CAMHS session and lose weight as opposed to put on weight. And it did go up and down the weigh, but it was going up and down as opposed to down. So that’s how we dealt with the trust, and my Mum finally agreed that I wasn’t lying to her. And I think as I did things as a challenge more and more they became less and less of a challenge until they didn’t become a challenge at all. And it’s still going on that contract. But now it’s down to like very, very small things that I find challenging now. And it’s mainly challenges like used to be having certain foods, but now it’s more doing certain things like going out with my friends, and making an effort to go out with friends and stuff.

Yeah it was sort of, types of food where you’ve eaten it, how, who you’ve eaten it with. Cos going out for a meal was a big challenge. Some challenges were worth more like staying the full day at school would have been like 2 points as opposed to 1 point which was half a day. And no points for not going at all. And yeah it was social things, food things and exercise related things like if I said that I had some weights today but I didn’t do as many as I usually do cos I was actually tired then I’d get a point for being honest that I didn’t do all my weights cos I was tired.

Sort of yeah. They arrest you and they have what’s known as arrest referral workers and they come and give you information whilst you’re in the cells of who you can go to get help. It’s then totally up to you whether you take that help or not but I’d wanted to get clean for quite some time anyway. And as I’ve already said, I went to stay with my Mother and I tried to do cold turkey and that just wasn’t working so the only route I could take really was to go on methadone. That was the only thing I could see to help me. So I got in touch with them and they sorted me a methadone script out within a few weeks.

Then like I say I left school. During the summer I was still smoking more and more cannabis and then towards the end of the summer I got introduced to heroin then. That was through one of my, one of my friend’s from school her boyfriend was using it. He was already an addict for quite some years and he was using it and he introduced our circle of friends to it. I turned it down at first but within a month or so I tried it and liked it and I kept taking it basically. We were just having it at weekends then for about 6 months or so. And then we stopped taking it for a while then started taking it again and I very quickly became addicted to it.

Right ok. The best way I can describe it to you is if I had had a hit now, ok, I’d be alright for the rest of today. I’d feel normal for the rest of the day. I’d then wake up tomorrow morning and you’d have very severe flu-like symptoms. You’d be cold, shivering, hot sweats. You’d have no energy whatsoever. Your legs would be aching, your back’s aching, you’re sneezing, you’re coughing, you’re vomiting, diarrhoea, you’re eyes are watering, you’re yawning. There’s very, very bad symptoms basically. You can’t sleep. You can’t eat. You’re constantly running to the toilets. You just can’t do anything at all until you get another fix. And life gets worse and worse and worse progressively over about three or four weeks and then slowly you get better after that.

It just became too much for me really. I think a lot of it is to do with the frame of mind because obviously going by what I’ve just said, four weeks you’re nearly, you’re nearly through it but even so because of what you’ve just been through it’s still too much mentally speaking, it’s still too much. So you’re still compelled almost to go out and score. And I just couldn’t take it anymore. So I went out and I bought some heroin and come back and took it. And that was there I was back to square one.

Towards the end of the summer I got introduced to heroin then. That was through one of my, one of my friend’s from school her boyfriend was using it. He was already an addict for quite some years and he was using it and he introduced our circle of friends to it. I turned it down at first but within a month or so I tried it and liked it and I kept taking it basically. We were just having it at weekends then for about 6 months or so. And then we stopped taking it for a while then started taking it again and I very quickly became addicted to it.

I know of friends, my friends of friends that are doing drugs and stuff like that but I think alcohol is a lot different because at the age when a lot of people do go out drinking and when you get to the age of 18 and that it is, you are legal to drink so a lot of us more going out drinking but then I think it depends on how much drink and when you go out drinking. So if you are going out once a week having getting drunk then it depends than if you are going out like four or five nights getting drunk.

it’s different to school. As at school you didn’t think about going out drinking or anything. it’s when you come to college like even around college there’s posters up about clubs in town and that and so you learn about different things and because you’re in town there’s a lot of night life in town as going to a school in different area then there’s not a lot of night life around it so you don’t really see it as much so you don’t think to really go out drinking. So I think that’s a lot why they drink on the streets but then I don’t know really why.

I think at school it’s a lot easier to choose groups because when you are all in one year you’ve got different groups. As at college because there are different courses you do or if you do A’ levels or whatever I think like a course it’s quite a small course size so like everybody is friends with everybody so really you haven’t really got. You’ve got your groups of friends but only a couple. As at school there will be a lot more groups which you could choose from to join because it’s all that year rather than at college there isn’t really because you’re just friends with who’s in your course unless you know people on different courses from school or. So… I think peer pressure has got a lot to do with drugs as like really you don’t. When you get asked what you feel as if you’ve either got to take it or you don’t. So like if you’re asked by the person that you don’t feel you can say no to that’s a different thing because it’s like that is a lot to do with peerpeer pressure has got a lot to do with drugs I think. But it depends on who it is that’s asking you and different. Like and it depends what your friends like. If you’re friends look at drugs in a good side or look at them in a bad side. So really it depends on who you hang about with and who your peers are really, as different. I think a lot of people get into the wrong groups and start taking drugs to look good or to just to fit in with a group or get peer pressured into it by joining that group so I think that’s got a lot to do with it as well.

A number of things. One certainly I think for a lot of people like their older siblings I think is quite important, like the fact that my brother never did like. I mean I’m not saying if he had of done drugs I would have done too but the fact that he didn’t I reckon does have quite an impact because like if you’re older sibling does and they can like. They’ll probably say to you like, Yeah it’s alright’ and kind of it’s fun’ and whatever and yeah. And if I look at my friends the ones’ whose older like brothers or whatever did means much more likely. I mean it’s not always the way but that’s certainly one thing. Also yeah and then like my  close friendship group I never really, don’t really, didn’t really get. I mean I have like lots of friends that like did get into drugs but kind of not my sort of closest friends and that is quite a big influence.

I didn’t use drugs in high school. I had some friends who did cannabis, mostly. There was friend of mine who went to lots of raves and did an astonishing variety of drugs when she was 16. I’d say university is the place where lots of people do get introduced to drugs. I know more people who use drugs now than I did in high school. Of course there’s probably a few reasons for that – my social group is very different now. At uni, you get to choose who to hang out with in a much bigger way and so I’ve gravitated towards other people who have an interest in drugs.

I remember one time I was saying to a group of parents that, you might feel like you’re aiding the illness at first by giving in to what they want to eat but until they can come to terms with the food and to come to accept it, the fact that they’re just eating those things is important. So you might feel like they have to have a small portion and they have to have that but if you don’t give them that they might end up not eating at all cos they’ll panic. So it’s like at first you’ve got to stick to just the portion so if like the first week it is just such like a half slice of bread with their lunch then that’s all they increase. Everything else stays the same because they have to get used to that half slice of bread and once they’ve conquered that they can move on to something else. So at the start it is, until people really come to accept their illness and come to accept the treatment, in a way, you do feel like you’re aiding the illness along but it’s not, it’s just that that’s what you have to do at, at the start to kind of get your mind into the right place first. I should think a lot of people forget that it’s, you know, it’s a mental illness and the changes have to happen here first before they can happen anywhere else.

it’s the same with my best friends now sort of there’s a massive group who are like so into drugs it’s unreal like more than most people I’ve ever met. And they’re such party animals and but they have their own problems individually well they’re still, some of them are in denial about it and stuff, don’t like to admit that there’s drugs that’s actually having this affect on them. They just think if they have like a little break from it then they’ll be fine and find I have conversations with some of them and like some of them, one of them in particular, he’s having massive problems at the moment, he’s having similar problems that I had. And I try and warn him but the thing is I don’t know him as well as my other friends we’re very familiar with each other and we know who each other are, we have like fun when we go out. But I don’t really know him on a personal level so I can’t be too I feel like I’m almost being a bit intrusive even though I really want to say to him Loo and I do like I do open up and I say Look mate if you, you don’t want to end up like how I felt like when I was like younger and then like a few years ago because that’s this is the start of it this is the start of paranoia and this is the start of something seriou and then one of my other friends I remember the other day like who was with us at that point when I said that who is so pro drugs it’s unreal, he would he’d just butt in and go No, no don’t be so don’t be so like up in the air about it like it’s not that ba and you need to what’s the name, You need to have a break, just have a break and then you’ll be fine and you can get back into i or whatever but, he’s a he’s not seeing he’s in denial himself with his own, but he doesn’t want to admit that there is a massive like connection with their problems there and that he needs to knock it on the head and this is something more serious than it actually is.

Yeah I think everyone as. Well there is,  there’s two kind of different. I would say among my group of,  is a lot older, well he’s like 4, 4Ω years older than me so his friends are all kind of like up in their early 30s. They’re all starting to get married and have babies and all that sort of thing. My friends on the other hand we just, we graduated two years ago. A lot of them are still doing kind of post grads and stuff. And so I’ve noticed the difference in their attitudes of drinking is quite different. And around my age people are still more likely to go to the pub several nights a week and just, you know, have it but more here then it’s all kind of more family orientated stuff now. So I’m somewhere kind of languishing in the middle, somewhere.

I mean to be to be brutally honest with you, I don’t think, I couldn’t have I couldn’t have seen myself surviving it really cos I couldn’t actually see, I couldn’t project myself forward and see a place, it, you know, past it. It was this, it just blocks off everything. There’s no future. It grounds you in the present so I couldn’t I couldn’t really foresee a future where I’d got to this point. I mean I’ve achieved things and can now do things that I would never have considered, you know, a couple of years back that I would be able to do. Which is in turn inspiring that I would be able to get to, you know, this place, hopefully, where I can look back and say, you know, Back then I wouldn’t have imagined that I would be able to do this.

Your internal dialogue, my own kind of internal dialogue was extremely disrupted. It was extremely complicated because I had this, people described it as like a voice, but and yeah, I think it’s definitely, I call it the voice, you know, it was like… But it was it wasn’t actually audible but it was it’s like this this kind of super critical negative, relentlessly sort of horrible series of intrusive thoughts that appear, you would kind of appear as a reaction to everything in in my head and yet I wasn’t in control of them. And they almost seemed like this external kind of, they didn’t seem like they were my thoughts even though I knew that it was part of me, it wasn’t something completely separate but it was it wasn’t like I willed them into being there. They would just occur kind of almost spontaneously as like a default reaction to any kind of difficult situation or they could just come about any reason. It would be and it would be, you know, kind of, it’s like it would be like having an abusive, like a bully inside your head really. I think perhaps for me I almost internalised a lot of the things that I’d experienced at school that kind of the sort of low level sort of being picked on, put down constantly that contributed to that building up. So it was almost like I had that inside my head but I was doing it to myself but there was nothing I could do to stop it.

Yeah, I mean there’s probably, there’s probably. I have two groups probably that I’m in, smoke with. Like I know various other people who I’ve, might share the occasional joint with but that’s not regular. My two regular groups would be the guy who I actually purchase from. He’s a childhood friend and his sort of group of friends who’ve  perhaps they don’t live their life the same way that I do. they’re from a similar background to me but I choose to live a legal lifestyle. I choose to go to work every day. they’re in like generally various jobs within drugs industry, shall we call it. I don’t know. I don’t judge them for that. That’s, everyone’s got a choice and you know the circumstances aren’t the best. Being a drug dealer is actually quite a lucrative career if, especially if you come from a poor background. You know it’s, it’s an easy option. And then I have another group which is, consists of a cousin, his housemate, a friend who I’ve know for about 10 years, and another friend that I’ve known for about 5 years. But I think what it is the other group they sort of, these guys are all working guys. They’ve either been to, a lot of them have been to university, things like that. The other group, the kind of drug dealer group I’ll call them I probably share more of a similar background to, but these other guys I share more in common with so the conversations that we have might be a lot more intellectual so to speak or we might discuss books, things like that. We’ll play video games, you know, we still do the whole boys thing but it’s like quieter.

I think the case there is look out for each other, maybe that should be something that’s encouraged, you know, the idea that you’re each looking out for each other, not just holding your friend’s hair back over the toilet but maybe more than that, watching how much each other’s drinking, knowing each other’s limits, knowing what each other can handle, and also being aware of, I don’t know, guys around that, you know, perhaps don’t have the most honourable intentions. Maybe that would a good approach to take of the, the kind of, take the kind of social side of, you know, drinking together and turning that into looking out for each other, and maybe this is how you should look after them if they’ve done too much, you should try and stop them from drinking too much, that might be more of a motivation than looking after yourself , if you know that people are watching out for you it might, you know, make you feel, you know, try to be more responsible because everyone, you know, to be the person looking after someone who’s really drunk the next day they can’t be more thankful, and you feel terrible to have impeded on someone by being in an absolute state and an embarrassment to yourself, you feel like an absolute idiot to have done that to a friend, you know, to ruin their night, and to have them have to take you home and make you drink lots of water and, you know it’s, maybe if that was emphasised the idea that you’re not just affecting you’re night you’re affecting all your friends night as well, that might be perhaps a good approach to take.

No. No I don’t. I mean but the thing is most of my friends who do drugs have been doing them for a while now. If I had for example, I mean  an example.  has never really done, taken drugs. If, and he’s doing an amazing course at  and he’s kind of set up to do really well. If  in his second year started doing huge amounts of drugs yeah I’d definitely, I’d say something, definitely. But you know if I said to my friend who’s been doing drugs since he was in Year 11 and isn’t at university, I don’t think you should do this. It’s kind of a bit late now I think. It wouldn’t really be to any benefit. It would be a bit embarrassing if anything. I wouldn’t do that.

At that whole, that whole time all that was on my mind entirely was what I’m going to eat or not, exercise and everything like that. I would, I remember sitting there in lessons and just that’s all that I was thinking about. I remember like sitting there and listening but also making notes, sort of numbers and calculations, and all that sort of horrible things. It was on my mind all the time. And I think that’s also the real change that my parents noticed, and started noticing things were wrong. Because I would just sit there starting, absolutely vacantly, and say nothing at all for days, and of course whilst I was sitting there all sedately, in my mind was this angry rush of , you’ve probably heard, but you do kind of associate the illness actually as a different a voice almost. And actually you would it’s your, it’s my own voice. But yeah, thinking about it all the time, all the time and so it, inside I was sort of loud and screaming but outside I would just sit there vacantly the whole time. And I couldn’t think about anything else, I couldn’t talk about anything else. You do start to think, talking about food a lot, and you watch a lot of cookery programmes and then you read all the recipes, all that kind of obsessive stuff, which isn’t healthy. And yeah when I was talking, if I’d be with my friends there’d just be, what’s really sad I’d be with my friends outside and they’re all chatting away normally, and all I would want is for them just to shut up, so I could think about what I want to think about. And not have to talk about this stuff that doesn’t matter, because obviously my, my habit is what matters, why do they not realise that? That’s what’s important. So I’d just want to, I just loved it if I were just on me own for two minute and they would just leave me alone. I could sit there and not talk, not make the effort, because that point, physically as well it was so much effort to talk to anyone and to think about anything else. But the illness was something that I knew, something that was certain. Something that I could think about, which would then, also meant that I didn’t think about any of the difficult things that I couldn’t cope with. I didn’t have to think about anything like that.

I think because when you arewell, I think several reasons. Because my whole my whole thing is about control, you know. It still is and it probably always will be. I like to be in control and this was not in control. This was disgusting, out of control. I, even though my whole anorexia thing wasn’t about being thin, the fact that I started to feel very disgusting and actually, started to feel a lot worse about my body. And also, I think it was hard, inside I was really sort of crumbling and quite distressed and quite like psychologically still having a lot of issues. But everyone else thought, Oh, she’s done so well. She beat anorexia. Gosh, she’s, you know, this case casebook, you know. She’s done such a great job with the anorexia And they didn’t realise what was going on behind the scenes as it were. And I really and it wasn’t and because it sort of, it felt quite disgusting and quite greedy. It wasn’t something I wanted I felt comfortable talking about, whereas anorexia, you know, you’re not eating. it’s not good but it’s not you’re not sort of over indulging and, yeah.

Anorexia nervosa to me was my way of control, my best friend, the one thing I was good at and the way I dealt with my problems. The unit did take my anorexia away from me. They stopped my life and forced me to eat 3 meals a day, two snacks and three ensures straight away. My life was controlled by other people and the one thing that was keeping me going was taken away.

Restricting food is like restricting pleasure and it’s like a compensation for any kind of fun. So the kind of example I use is this sort of holiday periods where I feel I can’t control what I’m eating and I feel like having the freedom to wander off around Europe and like see loads of different countries and visit loads of different places that had to be compensated for by not eating. And to kind of punish myself for that, for that freedom. And that experience. I had to like I had to kind of dampen the pleasure of, the enjoyment of that by making it really hard and making it, making myself feel like I was gonna faint the entire time because I was too weak, and yeah just, yeah being self-disciplined and I kind of feel, believe quite strongly that people don’t really deserve to have like, I felt that people just didn’t deserve to have any pleasure in their life. Like why? Why would you? Like why should you? You have to earn stuff and if you haven’t done anything to earn eating nice food, then why should you?

I loved that sort of feeling of pain I got from it. I’d feel like justified to do it because I, I guess it was, I guess it’s sort of that OCD behaviour coming back but in a different sort of way. And I’m guessing that’s, it really went together with the fact that you know when I wasn’t eating it was coming out in these sort of strange sorts of habits and… But then but with me that’s, that’s how I’d always, I’d always feel justified to punish myself because I never felt like I would deserved anything like, because as I said I have like confidence issues and stuff like that, and it felt right to punish myself because I felt worthless and I felt like, because I felt worthless I should be doing this. And I shouldn’t feel, I should feel pain you know, I like, I enjoyed that feeling of like hunger pangs and stuff like that because it would really, it would hurt. You know? it’s a different sort of hurt feeling that you would get, but it was a, it was a, it was a hurtful feeling that I could control, you know. 258it’s you know, there’s no coming down from this. You can constantly feel like this, you know, you can stop but you’ve got, you’ve got the power to stop it if you want to, but you can keep going if you, if you dare to go that far. And I always wanted to push it that little bit further.

In CBT they asked me things like is there anything that’s upset you, and I’d say yeah and then explain it. And they’d be like, Why did it upset you? What And then you’d sort of break the thought down like, say you think, Oh I can’t wear those jeans today, I look really fat And then they’d be like, What like you’d break it down into like thoughts of why you think you look fat. And you’d be like, Oh because I ate such and such yesterday Or, I just do And then you’d realise, I just d isn’t really, you know like a valid explanation for it. And you’d think well why, because I’m exactly the same weight as I was yesterday, I can’t possibly have gained a stone in a day, sort of thing, and you think, Oh maybe I am being irrational And it helped in that way to see it laid out like in three parts. Like the thought before, thought afterwards and sort of the rationale behind it. That did help seeing like logical, illogical conclusion sort of thing. It did help doing that

I was never a sporty child at all, I hated PE, and then when I got ill, when I first started losing weight, I thought, Right, I’m going to exercise a bit So I started doing sit ups , and then it became a bit obsessive really, it wasn’t healthy exercise, it was obsessive exercise, in that I would have something to eat and then I would need to do so many sit ups after it, and it eventually got to the stage, you know, where I would have to have some, my lunch or something, then the next three hours till it was snack time, I would exercise constantly until it was snack time, then I’d have a snack, then I would have to exercise till dinner time. So I didn’t have time for anything in my life, you know, I couldn’t see my friends, I couldn’t go out because I was exercising the whole time. And it got quite bad you know, when that, when I got very ill, I started getting sores on my back from like where I was doing sit ups and things and when, even when I was getting tube fed, I would still do sit ups in my room and the tube would run again, rub against my throat so my throat was burning, you know, through it and so, but I didn’t care, I just needed, I didn’t care what it was doing to me, what pain I was going through, I needed to do it. So I would do, you know, when I was at home, I would do my exercise in the house and then I would go for, you know, a three/four mile walk as well. And I mean, I’m talking when I’m life-threateningly dangerously BMI’s, how I need it I don’t know. But I find, you know, the power of the mind is incredible, and the physical pain that I was feeling was nothing compared to the mental anguish I would go through if I didn’t do it. And that’s how I think I was just so driven, and it was scary, when I look back it’s scary what I did.

You know, my poor parents, it was everything became a battle. They couldn’t leave me. If they left me literally, to go to the loo or to pick up, if the phone rung I would be off, you know. They had to lock, keep the doors locked and just, yeah, it was like having a toddler around. And then there were times I quite often, if I sat at the table, I would line my, I would always be adamant that I had to wear my dressing gown at the table. They thought it was sort of a body image thing but I’d line my pockets and I was putting things in my pockets and hiding them. I think my mum and dad have had, they could see what I was doing. I wasn’t that sly. I mean I was trying to be sly but they got to the point where they just they didn’t know what to do. They’d, we’d done the screaming and shouting. We’d done the chasing. They’d taken everything off the bathroom so I couldn’t lock myself away and they were just like at wit’s end. They didn’t know anymore what they could do to help.

Quite angry. Well, no, angry but at the same time also very fragile. So I would cry very easily, and cry practically every day. Yeah, or if somebody said something I would cry and like over noises, like every noise seemed to be louder to me. So I would think people were being really noisy all the time, I just liked to be quiet which doesn’t help because my cousin has Asperger’s syndrome so he’s not aware of like social you know, how to modulate your voice. I mean he just shouts all the time so, you know, I’d get quite annoyed because they came to stay with us sometimes. And anxious about that. And, yeah, I was a complete clean freak. Just, everywhere had to be really tidy and I would get quite cross you know, if I’d just tidied and then somebody came and made a mess and yeah, so I was angry and irritable but at the same time I could easily take the other way and be like really upset and, you know delicate.

When I wasn’t feeling good about myself it was a real big issue. I was very; I could be very argumentative, very aggressive. Then there are days sort of that come where I just, it’s not anger it’s, I just feel very well without saying depression, cos I’ve not got a history of depression, just very depressed and very introverted and in general I’m a very outgoing, easy going guy, and there just became days where you know even my Mum would question why I was so quiet or why I was locked away in my room. And they were just at times when I guess I was very unhappy with myself. But at the same time when I lost the weight or felt very good about myself I was at a complete high. And I was you know buzzing about it, and I felt great and I loved it and all of that. And so the mood just kind of, it just went with that. But there were days when, and there still are days I guess where I’m not happy with myself and I just like to lock myself away, and I don’t want much company. That’s when I feel bad about myself. But if I’m feeling good, it’s oh well, I’m in a perfectly good mood and fine. So the moods, you know, that’s the same thing. I never went further because I didn’t wanna feel like that. But there definitely are mood swings and it’s just linked to how good I feel about myself. Which is then in turn linked to my weight. So that’s just a very, as you can probably tell it just affects your whole life, because obviously if you’re, you know not going out or not wanting to go out because you’re not in that sort of mood, whereas the weeks you feel good, you’ll go out and you’ll be part of your friends, your group of friends and stuff. So it just has a real big impact on everything else.

I think it’s also important to sort of just highlight the fact that you know, even when people, you know, myself and other people talk have spoken to you who’ve had eating disorders, friends of mine. Since coming to university I’ve met several people, that even when the anorexia’s gone there are other things you have to look out for like depression, self-harm, all this kind of thing. So other ways to deal with the same problem and that’s something that’s a slight problem for me, not too bad. But, you know, I did have periods of low, very low mood and I know other people who’ve had, who’ve used self-harm to kind of help manage. And I think it’s, yeah, just important just to be, you know, even if you think, Good. Eating’s gone Just keep an eye cos it’s all, you know the same similar sort of underlying things that’ll cause you to do all these different things. So yeah, be aware. Yeah, and for other people to be aware, relatives that just, you know, just because you’re eating well again it doesn’t mean that everything’s okay.

Yeah like the first time he mentioned that, the doctor that diagnosed me was such an expert in his field and so he’s kind of you know across the country he’s renowned and know about eating orders and depression. So talking to him about it, and like the first time he said it to me, he said it as, Oh well, no I got referred to him and my doctor that I had at the time was like, Oh maybe it would be a good idea, like talking to you your mood seems a bit low at, like I don’t want to say anything but maybe it would be a good idea if we refer you to this certain doctor who deals with depression. And he could try and see if you are depressed, or if we’d say that you’re clinically depressed, or he’ll maybe diagnose you. And I remember coming out that appointment and just thinking, Oh she, she’s being ridiculous, I’m not depressed like, me having depression, I’m far too like, even though I struggle with this eating disorder and do have kind of a lot of unhappy things in my life, I still try and be optimistic about things and try, you know try and be friendly to people and things like that. I just thought no, depressed, depressed people, I’d just be like sat in a room all day and like, and that, that, it’s just not me. it’s just not my personality to be, to be depressed. So like I just thought, No like but that’s ridiculous. And then I went to talk to him, and he kind of explained some of the symptoms of depression. And the more he talked about it, the more it fitted with my life and the more I kind of thought, Oh yeah maybe. Oh, that’s and then like, so we had one appointment and it was like a couple of weeks until the next one. And over that couple of weeks I kind of thought about things and like some of the things where it is like you just struggle to get up in the morning, and just sad, inexplicably sad a lot of the time. Some of those things are like really related to me, and I’d kind of thought maybe that’s just because I’m struggling with life at uni, or, that’s because that’s just the way I am. That’s just the way I feel like, like life had become really difficult for me to get, like make myself get up and I’d kind of lost interest in a lot of friendships and people, like I’d just kind of, if I was, I’ve always been quite like sociable and enjoyed people’s company, but it got to the stage where quite a lot of the time if I was in people’s company I’d just want to leave and come and sit in my room, even if it was like, even if that wasn’t particularly enjoyable, I’d just want to kind of block the world out, and not have to leave and kind of did become really isolated and sad and then when he said depression it kind of all started clicking into place and I thought oh that would explain a lot of things. And he said there is often a big link between depression and eating disorders. I’d never heard that before or knew it but he said if we, if you want to do this research trial to help your eating disorder, it’s not going to work unless we tackle the depression first.

The reason that’s relevant is because self-harm was treated as a joke. People cutting themselves, it because, it was treated, even among like that, it was, oh, you know, emo cut themselves, you know, emo are depressed and stuff. This idea of, you know, whatever it is that doesn’t, nobody’s really seemed to but… and so it was almost like, yeah, it was very as well as being secretive, it was also considered ridiculous. But I just I think there was there was a point where I was I felt so crap generally, that I was coming home and crying, you know, every day and I just felt that, and I felt that it was my fault. That it was because I was wrong and, you know, broken or whatever. And so it was just kind of a fairly spontaneous way of exercising those feelings in some ways. It didn’t help but it allowed me to cope in a in a in a negative way. It didn’t cos it’d always come back worse as a result but it was like a temporary, because it does, you know, give you adrenalin or whatever and so, therefore, it would kind of have a very temporary effect of allowing you to cope. And also I guess in in some way, in some, it was almost like, for myself, it was almost proving that I don’t know, not it’s really complicated. it’s difficult to define why you’d actually do something like that.

Well I’d heard about this whole plant food one Six months ago. I was with two friends who like, they take drugs. They’re not addicts. They do it socially and it’s fine but I was sat talking to them and they were talking about this plant food that they get off the Internet and that was like, oh thank fuck I don’t do all of that anymore. I mean do you realise how fucking retarded you sound talking about ordering plant food off the Internet for fun. I mean it’s just sounds really stupid. I don’t know. I’m not really interested in what it’s like but

Same as mephedrone, that new drug that’s outthat is lethal that drug is, that is the, you don’t start coming down off it and this is how come you can carry on seshing on it because you don’t start to feel tired or nothing, well obviously you do but it’s not like Cocaine, you kind of come, you rather come down on it at some point, with this Mephedrone you, but you can be up on all night on it and you, you don’t start to come down until like the next night so, but then you’re taking more because you’re still awake and you want more of the buzz, but you, the buzz kind of wears off but you’re wide awake, you cannot sleep, wide awake, I’ve never done nothing like it. This is mephedrone? Yeah I hallucinated on it, I thought everyone’s face was jelly, I would never touch it again, it was horrible, never ever, ever, ever Okay. horrible.

Cos there was another two weeks after that where my life went, well it didn’t go downhill but it just dropped off the edge. I wasn’t talking to anyone, I was just angry all the time, exercising more, cut myself off, and then the suicidal thoughts started coming in. And I hurt myself quite a, in quite a few different ways, and I eventually tried to kill myself. Whereas quite possibly if he’d referred me to even a psychiatric nurse I’m pretty certain they could have gone like that [clicks fingers], and this is what’s wrong.

Yeah, well I mean a lot of people have just turned eighteen, so they’re going clubbing for the first time and, yeah you’ve got these cheap, cheap shots, cheap drinks, loud music, good time, everyone’s looking gorgeous and, a kind of a drink goes with that, I mean my sober friends night out, they still have a really good time, you know you don’t need to drink to have fun, but it just also again turns into, I need to be drunk, everyone else is drunk, you know, I’m not going to have a good time if you can see that the club looks an absolute mess, everything smells and  it’s not perhaps the nicest place in the world but, people just, you just drink you know? You’ve got shots of whatever and, cheap cocktails and, it’s just part, it’s just part of it, part of the Uni thing and even just like, even if you’re not at Uni it’s just part of being a young person and being, you know, newly exposed to clubbing and alcohol and all sorts of things, yeah.

Yeah very happy drunk,I can always seem to remember as well which is quite good. You seem to remember? Yeah I always like and it, but then I always find when you’re drunk you never feel like you’re embarrassing yourself by like, talking funny or saying stupid things but you always wake up in the morning and then you remember what you were saying and then you’re like, oh yeah maybe I was a bit embarrassing. But I find that I’m quite a happy drunk, quite like to get along with people and smile, so it doesn’t really matter. What do you see are the positive sides of drinking alcohol? it’s easier to socialise I think, I think if you were to put two people in a room without alcohol and two people in a room with alcohol I find it would be a lot quicker at getting to know each other if they had alcohol than if they didn’t have alcohol they kind of open up, people open up a bit more.

You don’t know what kind of way you’re with drinking until you start drink, and I mean some people yeah are quite fun if they have a drink, you know they have they get a bit silly and, you know, they giggle, some people fall asleep, some people just get really flirty but then some people get aggressive and I think that’s what the people don’t realise. And then some people who drink and they carry on drinking and they, because they don’t care, because they think oh it’s only when I’ve had a drink’ I think that’s the true effect of alcohol it’s not the having a good time it what, it’s what happens when you go home, you know?

Yeah. I think I was actually pleased at getting diagnosed with them because then it was like, thank God, you know this isn’t just how it is to be alive; this is something that’s wrong. It can potentially be fixed kind of thing. Cos I just, I just hated life cos I didn’t feel anything. It was just emptiness, not wanting to ever do anything, not caring about anything.

I remember when I was at school pretty it much, I mean I never went out on week nights really, only on weekends. And even then I wouldn’t like necessarily drink both nights of the weekend. Then once it came to like having a gap year that was probably when I started like drinking more than just on the weekends and certainly when you like travel well for a lot of people like me and  I don’t know if he mentioned we went to like South East Asia and like it’s a big kind of. Yeah it just one, like everything is sort of drink everywhere really cheap and sort of yeah special places like Thailand it’s kind of like everyone just like it’s some sort of a big party really. So that sort of like, yeah I guess the first time really kind of drinking like more than just the weekends I suppose. And then you sort of, yeah I guess maybe you’re in that kind of mindset once you sort of come back home and then go off to uni and sort of.

I’ve always, a in my previous kind of long term relationship that was never an element of it, but also because I don’t think of myself in that way. I don’t, and it’s only, it’s literally only been since coming to Uni that kind of other guys have started to comment on my appearance, and you kind of think, Oh maybe I’m not actually horrifically unattractive, you know And it’s reassuring that kind of there is, you know people see you in that kind of positive light. That you, I just didn’t think that people did at all, and it’s not how I thought about myself. So it’s kind of only impacted positively really. And also like having someone else there who you know finds you attractive and you know, in terms of your personality and your looks, kind of gives you the confidence to take those like big jumps that you need to sometimes with food.

Once you have more bills and someone to share your life with I think the urge to go out every day with your friends and get drunk just dissipates and you don’t have that any more. And also as you mature I think genuinely it doesn’t seem as important to get drunk. You can enjoy yourself just as much having a few, if not more, because you can remember what happened. I remember being to the cinema once drunk and not remembering the film at all which is entirely pointless. But I go to theatre, have a couple of wines then it’s quite good.

When we were sixteen we first started having alcohol it was, it was all kind of taboo, it was like oh we’re not supposed to be drinking’ and it was, it was nice to go to the parties, and everyone, would have a few drinks and enjoy it, and then when we turned eighteen it was like oh we’re allowed out now, we’re allowed into clubs and pubs’ so we’d go out kind of most weekends , go into all the different clubs in the City and having, yeah getting quite drunk because you can. you know you can legally go in the place and have sixteen pints  if you, if you wanted to, so I think there was a lot of kind of, excitement about being, being allowed to do that at that age, , and as time’s gone on from that probably it became less frequent, we’d, we’d just start going out just once a month and, you know, as opposed to every, every kind of weekend, and the, it would be more a special occasion not just let’s go out and get drunk for the sake of getting drunk because we can it, more it would be oh there’s a good DJ playing or, you know, there’s a good band playing let’s go see them and get drunk. and definitely as, as, as year on year goes on you, you, I don’t really go and get drunk for the sake of getting drunk anymore, and you know I’ll, I’m happy to have a drink but I’d more in, it’s more for the social side than the sake of getting drunk so, definitely happens less often now than it, than it used to.

Even now it’s hard, like look in the mirror because I find it really difficult but I’ve worked on that with like my whole body-image and workshops so I guess and I think, like that was in , when I was in hospital they do, they have like body-image workshops, creative and self-esteem and mindfulness. And I think it was really great, especially when you’re just, like your weight’s restoring and it’s getting to that healthy weight, and you’re feeling like really great about yourself.

Being really cold, always have like since I got ill; always have problems with being cold. Feeling freezing when nobody else is and circulation problems as well, like my nails not, they’re not blue now but they’re normally blue. Like everything’s sort of like, I never had amazing circulation but it got a lot worse when I got ill and it’s not really repaired itself that much like, just my hands will be absolutely numb with cold and sometimes like it, I’d be so cold that my arm would just go dead, like I wouldn’t be able to move it, and if I did it would be like, Ooh out of control sort of thing. And like aching as well. Feeling really achy, like my legs would be achy from standing up for so long, and my back would be aching from, don’t know, that was probably from standing up for so long as well. And probably from doing sit ups and stuff as well. You won’t sleep very much because, that’s another symptom like lots of tiredness and loss of sleep. My sleep patterns were corrupt because I’d been hungry in the night. I wouldn’t know I was hungry, I’d try and tell myself there was no such thing as hunger, I’m not hungry. You know, I’m just imagining it. don’t need anything to eat really but like I’d be awake in the night because I was hungry. And then I’d feel weak, sometimes I’d go a bit dizzy like I was gonna faint. But then there was times when I actually enjoyed that feeling, being dizzy because I thought, Oh it means I am losing weight, its working Sometimes I’d purposely get out of bed really fast in the morning just so I would go dizzy. To see like, Oh, yeah, I’m losing weight Sort of thing. Like as well your veins can like really constrict, like with the cold and that. So like when I had to get blood tests, because my veins had constricted loads that they’d have difficulty taking the blood, and, like it would hurt a lot because they’d have to do it a few times to finally get a sample. And then, oh what else is there? Hair loss. I lost loads of hair. My hair went really thin. I’d be in the shower and there’d be like clumps and clumps of hair, I’d, I kind of noticed it more when I started to get better. That all my dead hair, old dead hair that had gone all brittle and frail from like not getting enough nutrients, that all fell out and I started to get new hair when I was eating a healthier diet, but hair loss is definitely one.

So I went to a teacher at school who like I kind of knew I could trust and, like she was youngish and like fairly easy to relate to, and she was really, really good like, because I was 17, she really wanted me to tell my parents, but because I was 17 like if you’re, I think it’s if you’re less than 16 she would have been able to, but because I was 17 like she didn’t have, like I was too old for her to break the confidentiality or something. So like she told me to, but I still didn’t. I couldn’t bring myself to tell my parents, but she made me tell my closest friend at school. Like I was, so the day like I went to see the teacher and like talked about it for the first time ever, even though it had been part of my daily life for five six years, like I, just kind of sat there and saying it out loud for the first time ever, when it was obviously a big part of me. It was so strange, and, talked to her about it and about how I feel about it, and like the first thing she made me do, she made me get my best friend at the time to like arrange to meet both her and my best friend the next day. And so we could both tell my best friend together. And I was like, I don’t, I can’t do it Miss, I can’t do it. Honestl and she was like, Please just trust me, like this will make you, I can’t make you tell your parents, but and this honestly it will make a difference I was like, I just can’t have anyone knowing. But, she was like, she got me and my best friend there the next day and like my best friend was obviously really concerned and wondering what was going on, and I was like , and the teacher said to me, Do you want to, do you want to tell her And, and I was like, I can’t do it. I can’t, I can’t and I was like nearly in tears and so my teacher said, Well basically Emily been having trouble with this. Like making herself sick after eating and she doesn’t want to tell you because she doesn’t want to worry you but blah blah blah, and like kind of broke it to my friend that way. And like that, that night we went back and like walked and my friend was like, Oh, I’m just, I can’t believe I didn’t know. And like of course I don’t think any less of you That was one thing, I was like, I don’t want you to think I’m because I know it’s, I know it’s like something that I shouldn’t do. it’s obviously from, but my friend was just like, I don’t think any less of you, I don’t, I’m just worried about you, and I just want to help. And it was surprising when I spoke to her just how easy it was to just talk about it as though it was an everyday something else, and like ever since then, for the past like four years like, she’s been there every step of the way, and it’s just become another thing that we can talk about quite happily. I wouldn’t want to keep anything from her about it, and like that was the first a step. That was definitely like the best thing that the teacher could have done, it really, really helped me.

So coming here and having kind of formal meals, or you know formal meals, where they are literally like four course banquets, and it’s obvious to people if you don’t attend them, that is you know something that will get flagged up if you never go to formal hall. Because it’s a big, you know it’s a big fun thing for everyone who’s not got a problem with food. Whereas for someone who has it’s an absolute nightmare. And so like for me that was a bit like at first I was absolutely terrified, and I was like, Oh my God, this is just horrific You know there was literally just like wallowing in calories, and then you know, but even in the kind of the six months or so that I’ve been here, that’s not a problem for me anymore. We had one last week, it was a Harry Potter Charity Formal, and so, and you know we had, I went down there and just, I’m able to kind of disassociate myself from having to count calories for one evening, and I can just be like, No I’m just going to have fun

The first time I went out for a meal since I got ill was a disaster. I didn’t know anything that was on the menu and when I got there nothing I felt comfortable with having, so afterwards I really panicked and was upset for a few days. But when I did find a place, I looked at the menu and I was happy to go there, and I went and I had a good time. And I did feel guilty afterwards, but after a few times of doing it I stopped feeling guilty which was great, because I could go with my friends and not feel bad and it’d be wonderful to not have that voice in my head saying, Oh you’ve been so greedy eating all that It was like lovely to get that experience.

If anything it can be easier eating with people cos I feel more in control, even though I’m not more in control now anyway it’s, a lot better, you know. it’s, it’s more if I’m on my own that it’s harder but, like as in completely alone but, you know, if I’m with people then, I don’t, I feel, I kind of feel safe with what I’m eating I can think, you know, this is okay, I’m ou and cos that was always a bit of an issue, you know, portion sizes and, mixing foods and things I always struggled with. But having, if I’m with people and, I can see what other people are eating I think that then I think, can think okay this is the, I’m doing the right thing.

At the beginning I wasn’t feeling able enough to get out and socialise and everything, but like everything else that’s just fallen into place, and it’s quite strange now because every single night I’m out doing something [laughs] whereas before, you know, I was just in the house all the time, so it’s been quite, it’s great though, I love it. But again it was all very gradual and I just had to do things when I felt ready for them, and I did, I’d get to the stage where I do feel ready for things, you know, even now if somebody wants me to do something new, I get anxious about it, but I do it now, whereas before I just wouldn’t have done it and I do it and then I feel great after it because I’m like, well I’ve achieved that, you know, I’ve conquered that fear. So it is very much about facing your fears, you know, feeling the fear and doing it anyway.

I feel like I’ve missed out on so much of my social life, now I want to feel like every holiday I’ve got to get everything in social wise, and I’ve not given myself the time to revise really so now it’s like, oh I have my exams and I’ve not dedicated enough time to working. So it’s definitely for me been kind of a see saw with balancing things, because I’ve not, one thing can be in excess and the other not, like this time it’s been the social life’s been in excess and school work’s been non-existent, whereas in the past I’ve said I’m not going out because I’m doing my work.

Well I think she was relieved to get a diagnosis, she was, because I think, because that’s when they then referred me on to an outpatients unit which was a great relief to her. But yeah, I think she must have felt, it’s only now I realise how like helpless she must have felt, knowing there was something wrong but not getting the right answer from the GP and not, even though she was trying she just couldn’t control what I was doing, nor could I control it. But she must have just felt so out of control. Frustrating

It took us a long while to get the balance really because at first when I came home they were suffocating really. I mean we we’re fairly close knit but they were really, really kind of like overprotective. And so we had to get a balance. I totally understand that as well but it was it was, made things difficult for me and but for me, I think it was almost knowing when things were difficult and being, knowing and then making sure that that I knew they were there. But not forcing me to talk to know to confront me all the time and giving me space when I needed it. I guess in the same way, in some ways it’s like any teenager really it’s, you know, mixed combination of space and sort of support and nurturing but not so much that they dominated me and but so that they gave, they’d trust me to do things. For myself but also that they’re if I needed them and vice versa, I’m there if they want to talk about something or whatever so.

I mean even now, I spoke at a carers’ meeting a few months ago and my Dad says, you know, Even now, if I don’t see Stephanie for a couple of days, you know, if our paths don’t cross, he will still think, well I wonder what she’s eating. You know, I thought that was really peculiar because I’m fine now, you know, there’s no problem, yet my Dad, Mum and Dad still have that fear, but I think that will always be with them. You know there’s always; because I was so ill and so close to death, and I having lost one child, the worst thing that could have happened would have been to lose another. So that, I think my family and my friends are always going to be on their guard, and I’m going to be always going to be on my guard as well, because it could so easily sneak back in. But, you’ve, when you make that conscious decision to say, No I’m not going to let you do this to me anymore, it can’t fight that, you know, so.

So I was like very dependent on their visits then. But it’s been rocky really because I hated them while I was in hospital because everything they did was wrong. But that wasn’t me that hated them, it was my eating disorder. I hated them if they were late, I thought, I remember they went on holiday once and I was livid with them because I wasn’t going too. But now I look back at it and think they needed time out, you know they shouldn’t have to put their lives on hold because I’m putting mine on hold. So I was like really annoyed at them then, and felt like, Oh they’ve deserted me, they don’t love me really And all this, but they do because they’ve always been there for me.

We’re great. My mum and dad, I’ve changed a lot as well, they’ve been through a lot and I think that they’ve become more understanding of people. They’ve sort of realised their own kind of calling in life as well I think. My mum’s become so much more confident. She would never speak kind of out about anything. She was always really shy. She wouldn’t travel anywhere and through what we’ve been through she’s, you know, stood up at healing conferences and spoke to carers. She’s been speaking to other carers on a personal level and helping them. She’s coming to New York as well and You know, just she’s become more confident and I think cos she’s realised that, you know, she doesn’t when this life is gonna end or what’s gonna to happen in her life you just kind of have to take each day as it comes and live for the moment, kind of thing, and not be worrying about all these silly things and just putting life into perspective a little bit. And taking a few risks because they’re so worth it if you do and if it works out, you know, it’s gonna be great opportunities and I think that’s really changed her and it’s been good to see that change in her. I think that’s come through my illness because she’s had to be stronger and she’s had to be more confident and she had to do that.

I mean my sister, I think had a really tough time in that, obviously, all the attention was on me because I was unwell and I think she found that quite difficult, quite understandably really because my parents were very, very concerned about me but she obviously, had things that she was worried about, not, you know, normal teenage things. And she was, yeah, my parents were trying to, you know, trying to do their best and give her lots of attention and give me all the all the attention I needed but it just, it was tough for her and I can remember her getting very angry with me often and she refused to, after a while, she refused to eat with me, eat in the family, with the family because it was just, she couldn’t she didn’t want to be involved in it at all. And I think she got quite resentful of me and quite angry. Understand, totally understandably because I was tearing the family apart, basically. And all the attention was on me, every mealtime was a battle. Mum and dad were in tears, not sleeping, you know, stressed and for someone who hasn’t had an eating disorder and don’t have much insight into it, it does seem, you know, I’m doing it to myself. I accept for her, it probably looked quite selfish. I was, yeah, doing it for attention. All the sort of, yeah and so it was very difficult for her. And we did have a couple of sessions of family therapy but I wasn’t really into it at all because I think I was just past the point. So yeah, I think it was just I think she found it very, very difficult.

So I think, to be honest, the worst part of our relationship was that period when before I went into hospital, when I was hell in our house. My sis-it wasn’t something that’s really I don’t feel, affected our relationship long term. Since I started getting well, things started going back to normal. She I think she was quite relieved when I went into hospital and I don’t, I think it’s interesting, because I don’t think she ever, at the time, really expressed how worried and upset she was. Like I thought she’d just she’d removed herself from the family meals. I thought she didn’t care but actually, it turned out that it was actually, quite difficult for her, you know, understandably I guess, to see her sister in this state. And just like in a in a mental health hospital.

I was always out of my siblings I was always the big one. Out of my like extended family I was the big one. Pet names would be like fatty if it translates from like, but it was a kind of term of endearment thing, but it did stick with me. I think as well like the culture, it’s not like, if I said to my Mum or someone, you know, don’t call me this, this bothers me Its like, Well no we love you, and it’s done you know And it wasn’t, there wasn’t ever a view to kind of looking after that I guess. Just from the cultural side of it.

Oh absolutely. I’m not even, I don’t think its half way there or, to be honest, you know. But it’s I think, you do travel the road with your parents and it’s a different kind of, they have a different journey they may never ever understand what you’re going through, or they may understand kind of to different degrees, but they are your, like nature, like I mean if it’s not parents, it’s your friends and the closest people around you, and then they’re with you. And you have to acknowledge that they’ve been through something while you’re been through perhaps the worst thing, but they’ve also been through things with, alongside it.

Teachers, some teachers were amazing, other teachers were horrible. Some, yeah my form tutor was brilliant. She took me under her wing almost, and kind of cared for me. As you would do a kind of to a child almost I guess, as a daughter. I was, she was a biology teacher, I don’t know if that meant she understood any better or not, but she just seemed to kind of empathise and support. Other teachers were horrible, they were like Oh, she’s not been here for a whole year, so we’re just going to give her a C because and I was a straight A student. Like I, you know, this was, before that I was like got A’s in everything. And so, Oh, we’re just going to give her a C because she’s not really been here. So we don’t know what she’s like, so we’re just gonna like, we’re just gonna give the average really dismissive. Which I found really hard to deal with because it was like well they really obviously don’t care, and it made me feel like an even more of an outsider.

College was fine as far as the work was like most anorexics I am a perfectionist and when I was trapped in anorexia, I would do homework set that day on my breaks at college to be the best I could be and also to avoid my friends. As I got iller the work load got stressful but college was hopeless they had said they would take the pressure off me but then started complaining when I hadn’t handed one essay in after a particularly hard weekend for me. My tutor had called me in for a meeting as a friend had gone to her concerned about me. All they did was give me information about Beat but because I was in denial about my anorexia I never used it. Other lecturers tried to make me eat lunch or informed other lecturers that I wouldn’t be paying attention in classes as I hadn’t eaten! When I was at the unit, I was only allowed to go to one lesson a week, only increasing the number of lessons I went to if my weight went up. Originally college said they would give me a home tutor but when I started going to three lessons a week they said I didn’t need it any more, even though I was still missing nine lessons! I kept to the college timetable at home; did extra work and was getting excellent grades but they still complained about me not being there. They told me off for not going to English Literature even though I was further on in the set book than everyone else and I literally couldn’t go to lessons as they were over lunchtime or a time when I was supposed to have an Ensure. In March two months before my A-Levels began they called my Mam in for a meeting to say I had missed too much college and would fail my A-Levels. They advised me to take a gap year. My Mam disagreed as she knew I was working hard and that getting into University was my motivation to eat. So she told me to stuff the unit and college; how I would go to as many lessons as possible I started going to 10 out of 12; revised as much as I could and ended up with 3 C’s!

Yeah, I think that was I was that was just like the changing point in my life. It was completely new and no one knew that I’d been ill. Nobody knew. Yeah. Like, you know, you can just be this whole new thing like. Whereas at school I was still that girl that had missed like five months at school and I think that’s what I really like about it and made new friends and just kind of become who you want to be really.

But yeah, I guess when I found out I got into [university] and I really suddenly felt like, Oh, my God. I finally have something to lose and that all that was worth something on paper And yeah, so I guess that kind of changed things and it just I guess what my parents like thought about me didn’t really matter much anymore. Like I live in the middle of nowhere in the holidays and like I was always trapped there like with no money and to get away and I couldn’t drive and no one would drive me anywhere and trains every three hours, or two or three hours. it’s better now. And I guess I felt that meant like, Oh, in the future, like I will be dependent, independent, like I’ll be able to do what I want So yeah and then what’s, yeah, I guess like so my like the whole kind of behaviour, like eating disorder behaviour really liked died down. I was about eighteen.

Because I’m on like a professional course I have to see Occupational Health and be cleared by them. So I could, they could quite easily ask me to leave because of everything that’s gone on since being at Uni, but they’re quite supportive because of how my marks had been before Christmas, because I was getting Firsts and stuff. And it’s only since kind of Christmas that things have gone a bit more downhill. But like my Tutors who are really helpful have put stuff in place like sorted out extensions and I like have sessions with the learning support team to try and keep up with my work. Because I don’t do very well with not having a routine, so when I have like not very many lectures and it’s really difficult for me to not struggle. Because it just gives me too much time to think about things, and I’m not very good at structuring my time. So they kind of try and help me create some sort of structure.

I think the teenage ones were very patronising. Very patronising. They didn’t understand what my needs were and what, it sounds really bigoted, really they just, in the adult services they realised what were the key, what were the things that were important to me that are gonna be the big motives for getting better. Like my adult therapist realised that I want, I have a really good job and I want to have a close set of friends, but like having a baby or like having yeah, isn’t that important to me. So they’ve really like honed in on like, Okay you need to get better so you can like survive like internships, and, so you can like survive like a long day in the office or so that you can like see your friends They’ve realised that those things are important to me, whereas in the teenage services they just treated you like you were a child. And so they just like force fed you, and like said, You need to get better. So I think massively, I mean it might not be, I think I was, I think it’s fair to say I was quite a mature teenager, so I was quite shocked when they didn’t treat you as an individual, but treating each child more, realising what each child wants from their life more would massively help. And I also just think being less patronising. Speaking to you as a person rather than to your parents, or being very dismissive. And, yeah I think that’s, think that’s it yeah.

And it’s their job as health professionals to try and help people and it doesn’t matter if they think there’s not an issue. If the person thinks there is an issue, at least, you know at least don’t laugh at them and be like, No, there’s nothing wrong with you Because there’s nothing worse for someone’s confidence than to laugh at them, and tell them that there’s nothing wrong. So actually listen to them because the chances are the patient knows best. Yes, you were saying that people themselves will know themselves best, and I guess when people pick up the courage to go and talk to somebody they then should be taken seriously. Because they’ve taken such a big step in doing that. You wouldn’t do that lightly if you didn’t think there was something wrong. You wouldn’t do it because it would be embarrassing if you, if you did that and there was nothing wrong. If you knew there wasn’t anything wrong you’d just be wasting the doctors’ time and you wouldn’t, the chances are you wouldn’t do that.

I think one good thing is early intervention. I think as soon as I think this is more kind of at GP level, primary care, I think as soon as you kind of get into child and adolescent services they’re sort of, they know a lot more about it. And I know it’s hard for GPs cos, obviously, their job, they’re not mental health professionals but I think early intervention is the key cos both times I think the thing that made the difference between time one and time two for me, was that time two I was just about able to not fall totally victim to anorexia because I was able to get into some very good therapy before my weight got too low. I think if people are allowed to kind of pootle along at home without too much in help I think that things just spiral out of control and I mean the research says that all the lower the longer you are at a low weight, the less good the outcome is. So I think if someone presents to a sort of GP with possible anorexia it needs to be treated quickly, seriously, like even if they’re not that underweight, it won’t be long before they are and that’s when they’re really underweight, that’s when it’s harder to get back up. So I think early intervention is the key. And yeah, I’d I don’t think I think if it gets to the point where an adolescent has to be hospitalised, I think something’s gone wrong in terms of, if it’s their first time round, I think things can be done withoutBut I think things should be done to prevent them getting into hospital because I don’t think any, I think if you can get in there early it will be better. I think by the time you’ve gone through the hospital thing and seen anorexia, the real face of anorexia, I think it’s a lot harder to get back out and the longer it gets ingrained. So really early intervention, yeah.

Well if the young person, like if the parent was worried about taking the child to the GP in case the child doesn’t like them, in the end they’ll thank you. I thank my parents now. And they won’t be mad at you forever. Even if they are mad initially, you’d rather preserve your child’s health than think oh I don’t want them to be angry at me, and then they get really poorly because of it, because of you not taking them. Because sometimes it can be hard for them to take the step themselves because they don’t believe themselves to be ill.

I don’t think a forward attack works because that can scare the child. But let your concerns be known and stuff, and maybe provide your child with information so that they can realise what they’re doing. And if the child pushes you away don’t be afraid, just give them space but be persistent. don’t be in their face frightening them, and making them push you away but don’t be all shy. Keep at it and because eventually or hopefully you’ll be able to get the child’s confidence when they see that you’re not gonna push them away and that you care about them.

So they [parents] always said to us from very early on it’s your illness and you’re going to have to get over it yourself. Ultimately we can help you but we can’t get better for you. And I think that was actually, it sounds harsh but it was a really good strategy because if I’m not the one who’s in, like who’s implementing change, if they’re doing it for me and I don’t actually really want them, I don’t actually really want it, then I’ve got to learn to, then I’m not, it’s not going to work and ultimately I’m gonna have to learn like that as an adult on my own. So that was massively useful.

I think any eating disorders are a hard thing to deal with if you don’t much about them cos they’re scary and just really hard. So I think just get just any kind of professional help if you can because or go online, B-eat website, that sort of thing. Just like arm yourself with as much knowledge as possible to and just don’t give in cos that’s the horrible thing like it gets so hard. It could be easy just to give up but just learn as much as you can and just see a health professional if you can and go on B-eat website and just stuff like that really. Like you said that, you know and at that time, the child can be very challenging and it can be can be really difficult to know how to best help them. Yeah, it’s like they don’t want help anyway so why would you even like most ill people want to get better like any other illness. That’s why anorexia is so hard and difficult to understand because you have just like a cold or something you want to get better but with like this it’s like the person doesn’t even know they’re ill so that’s I think the patience is another thing that you need. Absolutely, yeah. it’s frustrating but get there eventually, hopefully.

I think the most, I guess the most kind of important practical thing I would say is just talk to someone about it, you know, someone, try and find anyone that, you know, you can speak openly with because talking about it is so incredibly helpful. It really is and I know I know it can seem impossible but try to value yourself and acknowledge the positive aspects about yourself rather than dismissing them because, you know, whoever you are, you are important. You have things that you can give to the world that no one else can. And that’s true, you know, and you can achieve amazing things. it’s just I guess it’s like trying to value yourself even though it can seem so against everything that you feel Just try to walk, however slow, just tiny kind of steps but to try and be proud of yourself and proud of your achievements because, you know, you are important and unique and special and, you know, there’s people who love you for who you are, I guess. Well, definitely and yeah. I don’t know but that’s essentially it.

When you actually sit down and you talk to someone and you lay it out and you say it, then your head actually makes sense of what you’re saying. And just by admitting to someone, I make myself sick or I have bulimia or, I gorge on food and then I do this just hearing it actually makes you realise in your head that’s really not the best approach. And it really outlines you know, it’s happening. It is a condition. it’s real and you need to overcome that and you’re not going to without talking to somebody, whether they’re a friend, a family member or if it is a, a support group, if that’s what works for you without talking about it you’re never gonna overcome that. And you know you may stop for a while, but if you haven’t talked about it thoroughly enough then you’ll fall back into it. You really just need to talk to someone and receive that support and then that’s gonna help you overcome it, or come through it at the end.

I think I would say, in order to get better from an eating disorder, you need to realise that it gives you nothing. If you feel that you want to hold on to your eating disorder, then you’re holding to it for a reason, and if you can work out what that reason is, you can then work with yourself or whoever you’re working with to come up with another kind of coping mechanism to get what it is you get from eating disorder. That’s kind of what caused me to change in the end, was that I found other ways to get the feelings that I needed and the comfort that I got from the eating disorder. I just now get it in other ways, you know, from talking or going out with friends or seeing my boyfriend or having a hug from whomever. And also it’s not a happy life to lead, you know, it’s not one and it’s not one that is sustainable either. You’re eventually going to get to a point where somebody steps in and you need to change, or the worst happens which we don’t want to talk about. So if you can make that change yourself it will just make it so much more worthwhile, because if it’s on your terms, it’s more likely to stick.

The main thing, and it’s such a cliché, is just to keep going at it. Because there is, like I got to the stage when I was in my darkest days, where there literally looked like there was no possible light at the end of the tunnel. And I was just beside myself, I had no idea where I was heading, how there was any possible escape. It was like I’d fallen down into the biggest pit and there was just no escape. And then all of a sudden despite everything the doctors had said, I meant, not only did it change, and I kind of went on an upward progression, but it was something that I instigated myself. That I had never thought that Id be able to take that step. I always thought that any help that came in recovery would come from outside. And it didn’t, and it’s just sometimes, no matter what the doctors say, it is literally just one of those things that can happen. And unexpectedly so, and I think that that’s something that people should always bear in mind, as parents or as victims, well victims, as sufferers of eating disorders that like no matter how bad it seems, like don’t give up on it. You know there is definitely potential for at least some degree of recovery.

My, yeah my upbringing has definitely changed my opinion because I know a lot of teenagers. I don’t envy them but a lot of teenagers that can have that careless thing of drinking and maybe taking drugs which I’ll never have. I’ll never understand why they have the carelessness of that because I’ve seen on the news about a girl that took cocaine and within an hour was dead and things like that. So I never see the carelessness of the drug use but the carelessness of alcohol I’ll never have because of my upbringing and because in my mind psychologically I see it more of an, obviously day-day I see it more of an addiction than just a one time thing and I sort of, I think I’d scare myself into thinking that it wouldn’t just be that one time and I’d want to do it again and again and again sort of thing. So I sort of stop myself in case I get addicted which I probably won’t but, you know, I don’t know how to put it really. It’s kind of like a psychological thing where I think in my brain I could become addicted to this so I don’t do it. But so it’s basically why I don’t really drink over the amount and things like that because I’m sort of scared of seeing my upbringing and my life that has been that it could be potentially an addiction. And sort of I don’t know, I want,  I suppose I once heard as well that it can be like, is it the word hereditary where it’s in your family things like that. But or an escape route really I’d say sort of could be seen as that like where I see my situation and I could have seen my situation with that I’m in at the minute or there was when I had my daughter and things like that with no family around and everything like that as an escape route.

And it was discussed yeah and the dangers and stuff and that had a total lasting. I know and a few people who I went to school with it also had a lasting effect on that kind of. This is what. And it’s probably, the thing that now looking back on it I, there’s part of me that wishes I’d been a bit more adventurous but which is that lasting legacy of that image in my head and it was probably very unusual and it was so rare for that to happen but it did definitely have a lasting effect on how I viewed what, you know, taking pills might do to you. I guess because it was so awful and so terrible but it’s just happened to a normal girl I guess and that really put me off.

I can’t think I’m hurting other people’s feelings so if I did something that I knew my Mum would find out and she’d be upset I couldn’t do that I just, I just, no it would bring me into panic attacks and things like that, and my Mum always had the best of them because like my Nana, and she’s still alive now, and she would, my Mum would tell my Nana and it would break my Nana’s heart if she found out anything and I, and I couldn’t do that to someone else, I think it is the best tool ever  if it works for the child, because she would be like, Oh if you do that I’m going to tell your Nana. And I’d be, Don’t tell my Nana, don’t tell her. Even now if it, you know, and my Mum says, Oh I went and tell your Nan. Don’t tell my Nan.

It’s like I’ve not really, well my mum and dad like said, Drugs are not right. Don’t go taking drugs because it’s not good for you and it will affect you. And nobody of my mates takes drugs so I don’t. I’m not like pressured in to taking them. So it’s never really been around me. I know of people like who went to school with us had a bit of a like, who’s had a bit of run ins with drugs like. And I just think it’s not worth, you know, getting into it because I know what it, you can see what it’s done to them like.

I haven’t really had any experience with them but I think that some drugs they’re like really, really easy for people to get like. Where I live there’s quite a lot of people I’d say that smoke and drink and take drugs. And they’ll just be like, no just say, Oh I’ll get a tenner off me mum and then I’ll go and buy some weed and stuff like that. And like they’ll just go and see somebody who they know and just get it easily. And I just think, God that’s way too easy. If it were harder to get then not many people could do it could they.

Well a lot more from school there’s like in our PHSE lessons and stuff like that they talked about drugs and alcohol and the risks and why not do them and why you should say no and peer pressure to do with that because a lot of drugs around this area is to do with peer pressure. So but they like told us about the risks and that so a lot more people I think that helped a lot of people as at college depending on what course you’re doing it depends on whether you get taught about them because there’s no, all you do is the course that you do. So like with doing the course I do, you do find a lot more about it. So

Why? Well for me I think it partly had to do with I do quite a lot of sports so I wanted to take care of myself to be in a position where it wasn’t affecting my game or, you know, my coordination or anything like that you know, I don’t know I think it was, it was just not something it never appealed to me and that, as I say I mean with the alcohol it’s almost like, I would say, a substitute in a way, you know? I think that’s possibly it, you know, why go to this extreme to have the sort of fun when you were having fun already using, drinking alcohol?

I think it depends, what kind of person you are if they leave you alone. If they see you as like a person they can easily push about and they can easily influence then I think they would have kept nagging but I’d say I’m like quite a strong independent person where I can say, No’ and people will know that I mean no. I think if you present yourself as like easily led and would do anything to fit in and like long to be part of group I think that’s when they like push you and push you until you do what they want.

The incidence at Glastonbury were, it was three, four o’clock in the morning we were sat around in a circle and we were by the tents and, you know I was offered this MDMA, I didn’t know what it was and I was just like, No I don’t want any thank you. And they, the person that offered it me was respectful of that, you know, andall of them were to be honest they were happy to kind of, I, whether it was, they were happy that I didn’t want to do it, or whether they were happy because it was more for them I don’t know, but either way there was, there wasn’t any peer pressure there, and I wouldn’t have crumbled to peer pressure anywhere, I mean I don’t tend to crumble to that. But I can see how a lot of people do crumble to that pressure if you want to look cool or something, but I think, personally I think you, I think people will maybe laugh at you at first but respect you more later, by doing so I think being able to have that character to kind of say, I don’t need it, you know, I’m happy with how I am feeling right now, I don’t need to take drugs. That they’ll probably at the time laugh because they’re high on whatever, but then the next day when they’re feeling rubbish and you’re all chirpy and like, you know, I’m, I’m great I did what I wanted to within reason and I now feel good. They will probably go, Well fair play, you know, you’ve, you’ve stood by your beliefs, you feel good. You know years on when they come to a point in life where I am now maybe where you look back and reflect on life, they go, Well yeah he made the right decision, he’s sensible, and ultimately yeah he is cool. .

Like I said my group of friends we were all the same so we all, like we would, where people probably went out drinking and stuff when they were younger hanging around we, we used to just go tothe cinema and stuff or like hang around each other’s houses, or go shopping, and those, kind of like young, young stuff, you know, because now I think, you know, teenagers are like more older aren’t they than, for their years? But we were kind of just the right stage. So, but I think because we never hung round with anybody who did those things we never did it, I think it’s very much the friends you hang round with, if you hang around with people who drink, if you hang around people who do drugs you are more likely to do it, but I mean I was lucky because you meet people around who say, Oh I was doing this at thirteen and fourteen. And I thought I, probably at thirteen I was probably imagining what boys I had crushes on. I had a great childhood, you know, and just did stuff that normal kids did, I never got into trouble and nothing ever happened and, you know, it worked out well for me, we just went to the cinema, and when we were sort of teenagers we went down to London on the train and stuff like that and, you know, just had a good time, but we weren’t, we never like drank a lot, like I said we drank when we went to parties and things but it wasn’t like we needed to go down the park on a Friday night, we would just go round each other’s houses and have sleepovers and stuff you know? I think it does very much depend and we were what  we were what you call geeks I suppose, so like no-one wanted to like invite  us anywhere, anyway, and then because we were, well we weren’t bothered, you know, and you think back now, at the time it was a catastrophe and, Oh we can’t hang around. But I think, I’ve probably, my life has turned out so much better because of I just did stuff that thirteen year olds, I thought I knew everything of course, you know, you think you know everything don’t you? But it, I knew nothing,

Yeah it is really hard. Because when you’re totally consumed you feel like getting better would make things worse and maybe at the start of recovery it will feel scary and completely out of control and like it’s a lot safer to stay eating disordered and it does feel, yeah you do feel safer to start off with when things are changing, but as the changes kind of are put in place and you get used to them and you kind of make the first few steps, it does get easier. Cos I know when you first start recovery it’s very hard because you’re having to completely change everything that is your normality. And you’re having to kind of relearn what is good and kind of normal in healthy terms rather than normal in your kind of world. And although it’s horrible and scary in the short term, in the long term it’s a lot better. And it opens up more doors to you than staying eating disordered and staying kind of ill.

Alright basically from a young age my mother was a heroin addict. And I think I basically lived in that home for six years with her being a user, a needle user also had the brothers and sisters. And obviously saw the debt of that and saw the way it can also ruin people’s lives and basically how obviously it can change a person. And so obviously didn’t get the best upbringing because of that. Ended up being put in care And from that I lived in, fast track again, but I lived in a shared housing and that on a day-day basis was just teenagers drinking and I did get involved in all that and it was a day-day basis but it was just seen at the time as a teenage thing to do, to go out and drink with your mates and things like that. But I don’t think, like I never, but obviously I’ve never looked back and seen that I was actually in need of it every single day and things like that but you just find it as sort of a depressant to sort of make you think the situation is not the situation itself but I don’t think I could ever, even at nineteen years old I could never turn to that as a way out because it’s not a way out and it’s highly addictive, highly expensive and it does ruin lives. And sort of you do obviously put people at second best when you choose to let that addiction take over really.

So. I think I was probably about seven when I noticed it like day-day basis. Saw my mum actually I don’t know what the word is but prostituting herself a couple of occasions for this addiction. And it’s very powerful and as a teenager now there’s a place where I used to go called the Jesus Army and that place can, a few people there can be heroin, I mean drug users or alcohol use and things like that. And you still see it day-day now like people using the stuff and how it can deteriorate their lives no matter what they’ve got as an addiction. And it’s obviously very sad that they can, you know, like waste their life away because my mum’s now 37 and she has wasted a good 17, 18 years on this addiction. Spent so much money and robbed her family, took loans out in her family’s names, lost us children. She’s got six in total and we’ve all been put in care and things, you know what I mean.

I think I expected the professionals to wave a magic wand and make everything okay, make me feel okay but it just doesn’t work like that and, you know, until you decide that you want to do something then the professionals can only do so much. Taking the first step is the hardest but the next time you try it, it’s easier; take things a step at a time. You’ve got to stop believing what anorexia says as you will die before you’re good enough for anorexia; you may as well fight back against anorexia now. They can support you and not to discount what professionals say because sometimes it does make sense and, you know, things do, I mean you do, your thinking is a lot more restricted if you’re at a low weight or severely restricting, you know, it does make life a bit easier if you let yourself eat a bit more and just take risks.

I could obviously be the opposite and go out and have a good weekend and get absolutely bladdered at a club and things like that. But it’s, obviously you’re intoxicating your body and you’re changing who you are from that and sometimes it’s not always a nice character. And you know you’re sort of putting yourself in danger, putting yourself at risk when you’re not 100% yourself and you’re out and about and you’re not at home, you are in a park or things like that and, you know, rape or anything. And for young girls especially that you are putting yourself at risk because there might be somebody there who’s going to make you vulnerable because you are drunk. So definitely it’s not all about the popularity of drinking and going to a park. I’m not saying obviously go to some park and play football and it is easy to sort of sit with your friends and drink and things like that but just remember like what you’re going to do, the fact that you are obviously at risk with the amount you actually drink.

And whilst it often feels like the eating disorder is in control of you, you are still a person, you are still there somewhere, and you will come out again when you get rid of it. And don’t listen to what people say when you can’t get better. Don’t listen when they say, Once an anorexic always an anorexic. It’s not true. That’s just rubbish.

And there’s so many, like so many people’s experiences of eating disorders are like, they range from so many different things, and like it’s just, it’s just hard to try and, the majority of the world just will completely, it’s only a few kind of misconceptions that are held, but the majority of the world will completely accept eating disorders. And it is possible to get over them. it’s possible for life to be good again. And you can be happy in yourself and you can, you know you can completely work your way through it, and it might be tough, but it’s definitely worth, it’s like if it’s tough at times at least you’re challenging it and at least you’re making yourself better, and life will, you’ll just be so proud of yourself for having come out of the other side. And you’ll feel like such a better off person for having gone through this, and gone through the suffering and you’ll just be so strong at the end of it. And do have the confidence to take the steps to make yourself better, because you’re fully capable of getting better. And you’ve got it within yourself to get better, and it like one day, it definitely can happen.

And if it doesn’t work the first time then just go back, just keep going until they actually listen to you. Because sometimes it does take a while because they don’t, not all GPs, well not many GPs do have a great understanding, so they might not realise what is actually going on and they might just think it’s a phase, but it’s not.

And I was coming home from work one night after what had been quite a stressful day just because I didn’t know my way around stuff, and you know, the stresses of a new job. And I suddenly became aware that I didn’t think I could stand up out of my seat on the bus. I was just aware. It was like I felt this massive chemical change take place in me and completely debilitate me. And I kind of thought, “I’m having a breakdown”. It’s almost like I knew what was happening to me. And I managed to get off the bus and I was saying, “Please God let me get to a phone box somewhere. Because I knew [Husbands name] would be home. Otherwise it was a fifteen minute walk which I could not have done. I found… I got to a phone box and I just said to him, ‘Can you come and pick me up. I’m in such a place. I don’t feel very well. And he came and got me into the car and I was just shaking and I was just weeping and I just said, ‘I can’t go into work tomorrow. I just feel so completely anxious and ill. You know I didn’t know how to describe it.

I can remember particularly bad days. I would only take the day in ten minute chunks because that was it. I couldn’t bear to think oh I’ve got all day at home here not feeling like I can do anything, yet feeling bored and feeling bad about myself. And thinking all these negative thoughts all the time. Everything in my head was negative. And that I couldn’t feel anything. I couldn’t feel anything for [Husbands name]. I couldn’t feel anything for the children. It was like being inside a very, very thick balloon and no matter how hard I pushed out, the momentum of the skin of the balloon would just push me back in. So I couldn’t touch anybody, I couldn’t touch anything. And I know in my head I loved my husband and kids but I couldn’t feel anything at all. My emotions were completely dead. And I was just very frightened. It was the most frightening, terribly frightening experience, and it looked like it was an unending one. I didn’t know where it was going to go. And I thought seriously then about suicide. Because I just thought I can’t bear another day of feeling the way I feel, and thinking there is no end to it. And I think what stopped me was that I couldn’t figure out…I mean I’d worked out how I could kill myself. You know, I knew I’d got enough tablets of various sorts in the house for me to easily overdose. And if I did it just after the kids had gone to school, I would certainly been gone by the time they came. But I didn’t want them to find me, and I couldn’t work out how to do it without them being the ones that would find me. That I didn’t want to happen.

I mean I… certainly suffer from loneliness and isolation, I often feel cut off from the world. Which is not, you know, that pleasant or nice really, because as I’ve probably said, I don’t have any other family, like brothers and sisters, and I don’t you know have any other family around like aunts and uncles, well I do, but they’re not in our area, or in my area. And so I feel, often feel cut off, and so I’ve got no one else to talk to or turn to, – follow what I mean.

And…. your brain sort of leaps to conclusions about things and you think, well all my friends haven’t phoned me, it’s because they don’t like me anymore. Rather than my friends haven’t phoned me because they’re busy, or because their baby’s sick. or they’re busy at work or what have you. You just think, you… you leap to the wrong conclusion almost every time. And I think that just sort of makes you become even…. a little bit paranoid, certainly I was. I’d think, oh why aren’t they ringing me? Why are people looking at me like that? I’d take my baby to be weighed at the doctors and I’d think, everyones talking about me, that’s not…That’s very…. sort of a strange feeling. And on the one hand, it’s like your minds racing because I had so much to think of, you know…. I’ve got to this or that for, for the baby or I’ve got to get to see my Mum in the hospital, or I’ve got to do this or I’ve got to do that. But on the other hand, it’s almost as if you’re going in slow motion. If you’ve seen these films where you’re standing still and everyones going around you, it was almost like that.

Four or five years ago I was diagnosed as having cancer, and I made comparisons between having cancer and having depression. And cancer is [pause] there is so much help and people are so kind, particularly the professionals because they are geared up. They know the emotional problems people have. And theres a lot of backup. And I’ve received kindnesses beyond words [pause]. But with depression that’s a different ball game really. And [pause] its’The two are so different. One is at one end of the scale, and one at the other. It’s the loneliness and the feeling of being utterly down and out with depression. With cancer you can say, “Oh, I’ve got to have a treatment, lets see if that does any good. And there is a sort of progression. But being involved inside the depression, you can’t see the wood for the trees, and you depend on people close to you to point the things out that you are unaware of. So you are sort of running in blinkers with depression, which isn’t the case with cancer. And I’ve found that people, not everybody, but lots of people involved in helping people with depression can say quite hurtful things. And that you’re in a pretty low ebb when you’ve got it anyway, so I’ve found that much more difficult.

With regards to depression and the effects it has, I feel that what I would like to stress is that the symptoms and the effects that it has on people, it varies from person to person, from a low to a very extreme level. And for somebody at the extreme end of this cycle of depression I feel that it is very, very important, in fact crucial that the help and support is available to them not only from their close-knit of friends and family circles but also from their GPs and also from the therapies that are available and accessible to them. Because if you can imagine someone who’s going through a physical illness that’s serious and you can imagine the physical pain that the person has to endure and deal with, you can actually provide support for them because it’s all very visible and tangible and you can see it. However, with depression because it is a mental anguish, very often the full brunt of what that person may be going through may not come out in the way that you would see in a physical way, which is why it’s important that that person is given all the help and support they need. Because I feel having a mental illness is far more serious than a physical one.

I remember during those 3 weeks everything that you seemed to look at was a way, you know, you looked at it from a suicide aspect, when you went over a bridge and you thought, that might be an idea, or a knife in the kitchen, yes, that would be a good one. All horrible sort of thoughts, looking back. And then I got the… I was sort of like a zombie at that point, probably from medication partly, also because I was I felt I’d let everybody down’ But yeah, during those 3 weeks at first I was sort of very uncommunicative and very obviously, people say my eyes just looked totally dead. And then, I was being quite closely sort of protected during that stage. Yeah, and at times I’ve resented the fact that I wasn’t allowed to die, as I had made it very clear in my intentions that I didn’t want to be kept alive. But, as I say, that’s in, you know, some of the lowest points, which I’ve never got to again. Although I have, you know, been depressed.

So, when I was in the union job I definitely had some periods of depression and possibly the first periods where I had what I called my deep depression. My mild depression is being generally pissed off, having a negative attitude to life, thinking that things will go wrong, but generally functioning reasonably well. The deep depression, I feel physiologically different, I have this sort of pressure around my brain, you know I feel that someones got their hands inside there. I feel confused, I don’t function properly. One of the worst periods I had about 5 years ago I went to the supermarket where I normally get my fruit and veg and I get my petrol on the way out. And I came back and I got my shopping and there was no fruit and veg, I mean that’s where I get it for the week. I hadn’t any petrol for the car. I came back and I thought’ Where was I for the last hour? You know I was sort of in this other place where I, I bought some stuff but I mean, I just knew then I wasn’t functioning properly.

I felt more, I didn’t seem to be able to enjoy any of the things that I tried at first, and I was just feeling very low and very lonely, needy. I was aware I needed something, I wasn’t quite sure what and I was, I think, probably about 4 or 5 months after starting my first year, I did become very depressed, actually, and just took to moping around. I think people could tell from just the way I was looking, the way I, not looking after myself, the fact that I spoke in a low monotone. The, my posture, I tended to stoop and just looked generally dishevelled and not at all, not really able to cope, actually, quite despairing. Despairing of being able to do something for myself, despairing of ever being anything myself, despairing of being normal which, you know partly, I would like to.

Not really, because whilst I always believed that my depression started in my teens, I’ve more recently come to the understanding that in fact, it started around the age of 7. And even as a young child 7, 8, 9, I would sit with other people, other children, and it was as if I was on the edge. And I wasn’t part of it, and there wasn’t a lot of joy or happiness. I had friends, but even that, it never seemed to be enough. So… life was very difficult, right through until I suppose I had a diagnosis at the age of about 19, and that was because I was having difficulties at work, and my employer said, “I think you ought to see somebody”, and I was referred to a teaching hospital in London where I saw an eminent psychiatrist who diagnosed chronic depression of several years standing. That was really based on what I was able to tell… tell him then, and he recommended psychotherapy, which I had for nearly two years.

I suppose sort of from returning from the holiday, although I’d felt sort of tired and run-down. It was always a… always a tendency, certainly initially, for people to put it as something else, you know, rather than accepting, you know, you were diagnosed as a depression. You think, oh, I’m run-down, it’s physical. And I think, you know, in some ways I still do that now. But I had felt quite sort of locked in and difficult too expressing very well. And I know I wouldn’t…. I went through a phase when I didn’t speak very much at all. But the psychiatrist came out and he put me on Amitriptyline.

When I was first diagnosed and had that experience having been chucked out of hospital after 5 days’ If I’d had had the support then that I’ve had since the 1980’s things might have been a lot different. I might not have had to have gone through all that. If it had been recognised, it was, it was just not recognised that I was ill enough. Or as I say, it was decided for some reason I was to go. You know, perhaps, I was taking up a bed or something. They actually were quite cruel, they really were quite cruel. But I’m sure if I’d had the same treatment then as I had in the ’80’s, I mean I don’t think depression goes away, but there must be something that you know, you get on and off over the years. But with modern medication, theres going to be other progress isn’t there. You know, so don’t despair. No, if, if they’d at least have acknowledged how ill I was then it would have made a difference.

Yeah, but I think when you’re actually faced with, “Oh my God I would have jumped if someone hadn’t come in”. That just absolutely petrifies you because you know that you’re young, you shouldn’t be feeling like that, it’s not right, theres got to be something wrong. Can somebody take me out of this environment? Is it my environment? Is it me? Is it’you want someone to sort of answer those questions for you.

He was a nice man and he was a good sort of . just warm and tender kind of chap. And he said, “Well were going to give you something just to stop your mind whizzing,” I remember him saying that. I don’t even know what it was, probably nothing. He was like, he made me feel okay my mum was not there, this is you and me, you’re an adult, this is between you and me, which I don’t think I kind of understood that actually. I didn’t think he was ever’ I don’t think I ever really realised he was my GP, I think he though, I thought he was our GP. I’d never made an appointment to see the doctor off my own back, I’d never phoned up and said, “Can I see my doctor?”, probably would never have gone to see him if it weren’t for my mum making the appointment. Interesting isn’t it. So that was helpful, and he was a kind of, I suppose before hed always seemed a sort of, kind of rather you know, a figure of authority to go with all the other ones. Then when he starts to talk to you, then you sort of you realise, God this man in his fifties knows what it’s like to be sixteen, talks to a lot of sixteen-year-olds, knows what it feels like to feel shit. And lots of people have felt the way I feel, and that really helps. And it sounds trite but it’s true. He was a good GP, he was a good GP.

She's good because she is human. She listens and she responds to me as a human being, not as a professional. She gives me time, as much time as I want sometimes. She cares and shes shown me she cares because she has rung me up before at home and said, ‘How are you? Will you come and see me tomorrow?’ because she knows I’m not going to ring and make an appointment because I’ I mean I’m in isolating mode and things are going wrong. And so she is on the phone ringing me and she is encouraging me to talk, to go to her because I haven’t tended to go, only ever go to her in crisis. I’ve never gone at the beginning or the middle stage. I’m usually in a great crisis to have to go and see her. And shes been trying she has been trying all these years I have been seeing her, to educate me, to go before the crisis. You know, ‘Why don’t you, you’ve been feeling this way for six months and it’s just got worse and worse, why didn’t you come before?’ And you know, ‘Come and see me next week. You know, ‘You never come, I’ll sit and listen. You know, she is a human being, she has made mistakes and that’s fine because she is a human being and I know shes a human being because she talks to me like, like I’m a human being and shes a human being. She is always fully present always as a person. Shes never standoffish or looking at her watch and thinking, you know about the next patient. Never.

You see because like me and my husband don’t really drink because he’s just got, you know for one reason or another caused too much problems really and I think sometimes when you end up drinking and you’re not having a good time and, you know, it, it brings out sort of aspects of your personality where you’re quite angry and aggressive and then so there’s no point drinking because it’s, you know, you’re just bringing that on so, but my Dad finds it amazing how, you know, how we don’t drink, and sort, he’ll sort of say, Oh when she’s gone you can have a drink. Or, When she’s not here. You know and really that kind of like you think you would support someone who was making a decision with their life, if someone said, Oh I’m going to give up Heroin. And you wouldn’t just go, No, it’s okay when she’s gone I’ll, you know, I’ll help you jack up. You wouldn’t say that to them but it’s okay because drinking’s a part of going out, it’s a part of socialising, it’s a part of having fun it’s a part of having friends, so if you don’t drink it’s the word boring’ always comes in, I says, How can someone be boring?. I think if, the most boring people are the people who you meet and they’ve just got no personality, and then when they go out and drink, you know, they’re the life and soul of the party, that’s sad because they can’t be that person every day only when they’ve had a drink, that’s the sad part, not the person who can go out and have a good time and doesn’t need to drink but, it’s all.

I couldn’t imagine being able to go along and tell him any of the things that were really going on inside me. Because how would that affect our friendship, and our friendship was a family friendship. You know, we went out socially, his wife and himself, and myself and my husband. Our children played together, and I felt that if he knew the real me, you know, he wouldn’t necessary want to go out and spend social time. And it was like uncovering something in myself and at that time I saw as, as a weakness. Well I obviously’ it all became too much and I felt myself sort of falling onto his desk weeping and he was quite taken aback. You know, “What’s wrong?” and I… it all just started and it came out one thing after the other, how miserable I was feeling, and about, you know, how low I felt. And I couldn’t bear to continue living like that any longer. And that my friend had insisted that I come in and talk to him and, and he was really good. He wanted to know why I hadn’t spoken to him before and I said, “That I wanted, I wanted you to recognise that there was something not quite right, and you didn’t.”

Well shes been ever so nice. Shes been really, really kind and helpful, but I’ve always felt that she focused so much concern on me every time I went to see her that I got completely nervous and flustered. And my voice would just get quieter and quieter while I talked to her and anything I’d been thinking of talking to her about would just go out of my head. It was just unnerving having that amount of attention focused on me.

You go to the surgery and every time you go back to your surgery you see a different GP [laugh]. So that by the time the next one comes up, it’s about three months down the line, and then you ask for a sick note for two months. I don’t know. You’ve just got to feel confident. You just have to prepare yourself that it’s ok to feel like this. I’m not being a fraud. It really is that self belief. And it’s really, really hard because if you are depressed anyway you have got such low self esteem that you feel a complete fool. And then. In that case I guess it would be a good idea to take someone with you.

An advocate definitely that can speak up on your behalf. Or write it down, write it down before you get there as well. Write down what is debilitating, how you feel and stuff. For the actual daily appointment you might feel absolutely fine, and that’s ok. It doesn’t mean that you don’t experience depression but the following day… you know you couldn’t go to work or anything.

I’m aware that over a very long period I used to have lots of, minor ailments, and again, I didn’t think that any of the GPs I saw took seriously anything that was wrong with me. And they certainly didn’t look at the bigger picture and think, ‘Is this person unhappy, is that what all of these ailments are about?’ So again I didn’t think I was necessarily, looking back, I don’t think anyone was taking a proper view of my health, as a whole, and saying perhaps it’s actually, you know, if I’m saying to this person, you know, it’s all in your head then maybe I should be looking at your head [laughs] and that decision didn’t seem to be made.

Feeling there was something, feeling I was being a nuisance for going to the doctor. For saying there was something wrong with me when the doctor didn’t think there was something wrong with me, for time wasting. I felt like I was just being a drain on my doctor. I was given antidepressants at one point, I think it was Prozac, and I was on those for about eighteen months or so. But I was never given a particular explanation of what they were to do with, other than they might help – have a side-effect of weight loss. Well that’s [laughs] I don’t think that’s a particularly good thing, but it helped me explain away why I was on antidepressants.

But I had a GP that was quite interested in how I was, which was good. And then I had Bells Palsy, which really, really threw me – the facial paralysis. And I had a high dose of steroids, and I think that was just like the icing on the cake, that was just the end of it. I was very low physically and clearly very low mentally, and the GP. and I’ll be forever thankful for him, actually said, ‘ I don’t think I am helping with the right kind of medication for the right reasons, and if you agree I’d like to refer you on to somebody. And it was like an immense relief, it really was an immense relief. Half of me was thinking this was a disaster for me because I was going to see a psychiatrist, and the other half was thinking, hooray, somebody’s actually going to treat me as somebody who has a problem here. So I went along, to the assessment, and as soon as I said out, lots of things about my life and about the way I felt in my life, there was no sense of you’re in the wrong place, it was, ‘ Fine, we think we can help you with it. And it really was a huge relief, and they immediately put me on a proper dose of antidepressants, and saw me regularly, and I actually felt that somebody was for the first time, somebody was actually listening to me. It was only about the third appointment that I felt brave enough to say, ‘What do you think is wrong with me?’ and the psychiatrist at that time said, ‘I think you have what’s known as a double depression. So you have dysthymia, which is chronic depression, which you’ve probably had since your teens and I thought well, that makes sense – And he said, ‘And at the moment you have a depressive episode. And I thought yeah, I can understand that.

That was in 1963 and [long pause] I was most offended. I thought I’m not, and what’s he talking about. So he gave me a letter to give to my GP and my GP arranged for me to go and see a psychiatrist at a big hospital. And when I got there my wife came with me and he asked me questions about how I felt. And I should have told you that I was normally about 11 stone. But by this time I was down to about 7 stone. And so I felt pretty ill and I got to the point where I would sit in a darkened room and not want to talk to anybody. So I was totally withdrawn, and I explained all this to the psychiatrist. And then when I’d finished, which was a terrible ordeal because I was loathed to talk about myself, he then said, ‘I’ll tell you a bit more about how you feel”, which was the most wonderful relief because I thought this was just peculiar to me. And he took a great burden off my shoulders.

I felt my psychiatrist was a very…. oh… wet individual. Again, I think because I’d been quite a numerate, factual, organised person, to have someone to talking about feelings and what about this and what about that? And it was… nothing could ever be pin-pointed or…. I just found it annoying. And I found that they didn’t deliver on things that they’d promised.

I’ll just give you one example. I met one chap and he didn’t even say, ‘Hello’ to me. He sat in a chair cross-legged with no shoes on, which bothered me for some reason that he didn’t have any shoes on. And he didn’t say a word. And this was our first session. So I ended up saying, ‘Where do you want me to start?’ And he said something like, ‘Where do you feel comfortable, where do you want to start?’ And it’ that’s the way it went you know. I think he did ask a couple of questions. ‘What was your earliest childhood experience?’ And it was just like oh, very textbook stuff to me and it put a barrier up. I instantly thought, ‘Fuck you, you know, you’re not getting any where near me. There is nothing wrong with me and actually I even said it a few times,’ Nothing traumatic has ever happened to me. I have, I had a very nice childhood thank you. I said it loads of times and that was so untrue. I said it and. and it was untrue. But it was dealing with these kind of professional people that are asking me these professional questions about, ‘What was your earliest childhood memory? What was your earliest this. You know, I just couldn’t deal with them. I instantly thought, you know, ‘Fuck off I can’t deal with you. I want to deal with a human. But the psychiatrist I had did harp on. He eventually left and somebody else came in the last two years but he was a great therapy psychiatrist. He believed in therapy and he would go on and on about how much, you know, I really needed therapy if I was ever going to recover. If this vicious pattern I was in was ever going to stop, then therapy was the answer. And I didn’t just. I just wasn’t listening. And I didn’t believe him.

And I feel that I’m getting a wee bit more confidence in myself. But it only takes somebody to say a wee thing sometimes and my paranoia takes over. And it’s quite frightening.. It’s about trying to control my thoughts right, convince myself, you know, that these things are in my head, that I am not in them. But when I’m like that, it’s reality to me and it’s quite scary, it’s quite scary. And my friend who… she has stood, shes been with me the last months, because I realised everybody that I helped in life when I’m looking for help, there is nobody there for me, except my doctor and my psychiatrist and my CPN. [laugh] They are there for me but not…. never anybody else I tell Dr [name] and Dr [name] everything. I don’t keep anything. [laugh] And I know that I don’t lie about anything.

Then the next thing was that actually a social worker who. they tend not to do this very much, but she actually came round to the house where I was living with my father after I’d dropped out of University, after I’d made a suicide attempt. And she was helpful in a few ways in that she actually got my father to understand a bit more about my depression and that it wasn’t just a case of laziness. It was a case of not being able to function, really. being completely lost. And she also did have hour long sessions with me at home and I think I got, you know, I was into talking about things and possibly I was talking about the way things could go. And that was probably beneficial, actually. I think I was completely isolated at that stage, and she would make positive suggestions. She wasn’t like the psychoanalyst in that sense, she would say, ‘Well, maybe you could move away from home?’ And she also investigated possibilities for doing that. And I talked quite a bit about my Mum, again. And the kind of frustrations I had.

Well in this part of the country, there is excellent support for mental health problems. And I don’t know whether it was the community psychiatric nurse, I don’t know whether they had those at that time, but I had a mental health social worker. Who, she was extraordinary, she really was good. And she did things like, knock on my door, I mean she but I’ll start at the beginning. Before I came out of hospital she took me over and I came home for 2 afternoons to this house which was freezing because it was January. And [pause] gave me a pile of my paper and my bills and things that I needed to sort out, and I sat in the on the floor there and did that until she came back to get me. And so that one I’ll throw away and that one I’ll need to do something about, it’s all, it’s all I could do, I couldn’t move. Honestly I couldn’t move. If I’d gone like that it would have burst the bubble and I was safe in this bubble. So that’s what I did. And then we did that a couple of times and then I think she must have kept coming to see me.

I was at work. At the time, for [company name], I was under immense pressure and suddenly I, one of the managers there came in and started having a go at me about something that wasn’t actually my problem really. And I flipped and I’d never done this before in my life. I just lost it. I started shouting and crying and chucking, well not chucking things, but I walked out. Basically. I walked out there and then. And that was me. I was gone for six months and never went back. I came home [pause]. That act somehow spurred me deeper, and I eventually thought I can’t go to work. I can’t get to work. I can’t do it any more so that pushed me to go my GP to get a sick note, there to get signed off so I could get paid, so I could, the mortgage would be paid. So some part of my brain was functioning [laugh]. So I went to my GP. She arranged for me to see the CPN (Community Psychiatric Nurse) again, get in contact with the CPN again. We arranged an appointment. I think the CPN rang me and came and we talked but I didn’t feel at the time she was taking me seriously. I didn’t think she felt [pause] I don’t know. I just didn’t think she was taking me seriously and, or perhaps I wasn’t explaining myself very well, but I felt a lot worse than she thought I was, I think.

They were young. I just felt that they were very much coming from a kind of theoretical thing. And their training seemed to be you’ve got to get your clients to progress every week. So every week they were setting me some sort of challenge, even if it was only to go shopping or whatever. And I look back now and think they were well intentioned, but they were pushing me too hard. And I said to the consultant eventually when I got well and you know I… She asked me what my kind of thoughts were about the OT department, and I kind of said well intentioned, but I’m not necessarily sure that they got it right in terms of measuring where I was up to. You know they were pushing me too hard. And of course if somebody is pushing you too hard then you feel anxious and you also feel a failure if you are not managing what they want you to do.

Well, I snort ket because I can’t really swallow it I felt like I want to be violently sick afterwards if I accidentally eat it. The main side effect of snorting, though, is the drips down the back of your throat and you’re left with a nose that doesn’t quite work. The drips, well, you end up tasting them, and it’s kind of horrific and highly unpleasant. Once you’ve started snorting, the taste wears off a bit because you’re anesthetised. But the first few snorts are horrible, horrible! Sometimes I think of taking it again but the idea of that taste totally scares me off. Obviously there’s other reasons, too, like fear of taking it too much, but the taste ew, the taste alone is enough to make me not want to take it again.

But I still… I was still waiting for this feeling of happiness I suppose to come in, and it didn’t. And then one morning, and it was exactly 7 weeks to the day that I took, you know, the first tablet. I woke up that morning and I just knew that inside myself that I felt different. I’m not, I don’t know that I could describe it, or have the language to describe it, I just know, I knew that morning when I woke up that I feel differently, things are different. And that was the turning point. So I think I’d started medication towards the end of May and this was into July. It was this lifting again, this lifting of overall and just…. contentedness I think probably, this, it was, back there again, from I don’t now how long ago since I had felt that way. Whether it was a combination of that and the sleep that I just generally began to feel better. And, and physically more well. And happy again. You know, I think I began to laugh out loud again and, and that it was from inside, it wasn’t just a sort of superficial laugh, it was a sort of deep inside laughing.

Because I don’t feel like I’m out of control. I don’t feel like I’m not being myself. I feel, I.. [sighs] I suppose I feel a little bit more secure in myself. A little bit more in control of myself, more in’ I’m in more of a routine with it. So, you know my sleeping patterns are a lot better, than what they were. I did get ill on it, I’ve never really been physically sick, but most anti-depressants I’ve taken have made me feel queasy for a couple of weeks. Efexor was a bit different, I felt sort of queasy, a lot less, I was given 75mg to start with. And when I moved to the hospital, they put me up to 150mg.

Well, since I was very little I had occasionally had suicide fantasies. When I was little I used to imagine creeping out of the house at night up to the nearby railway tracks, and that was… that was in a way a comfort for me, because you know sometimes I would feel like my life was completely out of my control, and I didn’t have any options. But then I would always think I did have another option, I could take my life into my own hands and you know sometimes, sometimes I would feel ignored or unloved, and then I could imagine how people would feel if I did kill myself, and you know, it would remind me that people did love me And for many years I hadn’t had any suicide thoughts at all, and I had certainly never thought of cutting myself, but while I was on Seroxat, I did start to get sudden images in my head of you know, cutting long gashes in myself, and just… just seeing the blood running everywhere and, you know, the feeling of compulsion to do it. You know, feeling a need to see that, and I did used to get images coming in my head of lying in a blood- filled bath or jumping into a river or off a tall building. And those images would just sit in my head for a long time until they just melted away, and…sometimes they left me feeling a bit disturbed, but usually they didn’t cause any emotions in me.It was like… like my personality had been withdrawn and my rational mind had been overwhelmed, or insulated or cut off in some way and I was just purely running on immediate needs…

I was just completely off my head with depression. I was down in a pit of despair and really quite unstable. And I thought, “What you are doing to yourself, [interviewee name]?” So I just, and I got back on it. And the reason why I know those feelings are really bad is because if I’ if I forgot to put my prescription in, and I would go about a day to 2 days without it, the symptoms would start. About 48 hours of. after stopping the tablet, if I missed a dose, and the and the symptoms were so acute it was very frightening. You feel sick, nausea, the nausea was awful. And just panic, really.

I’ve been prescribed antidepressants in the past but I’ve always felt reluctant and apprehensive about taking it, largely because a) I feel that the effects are probably short-term, they’re not going to actually resolve the depression, b) because they do have side-effects and, c) I didn’t feel comfortable, myself, with taking some tablets. There was one particular tablet I was prescribed, it wasn’t Prozac, but it was something that was on a lower scale which I started the course…. but I only took them for a few days and I feel that, looking back now, that I didn’t actually take them for long enough, anyway, to have any [pause] authority to say whether they would have helped me or not.

I can’t remember it was that long ago. I know it worked at the time. No side-effects. Sort of kicked in within a week, and got me out of a rut. I think I was feeling very tearful, very depressed and it lifted my spirits. I don’t know how long, whether I was on it for six months or a year. But this enabled me to get on with life and. And I think see it wasn’t one of those nasty early depressants or heavy ones like, I don’t know I mean there were it’s quite fashionable. Prozac is quite a fashionable antidepressant. And it was ok to say you were on Prozac, it’s like a happy pill isn’t it. I’m OK I’m taking Prozac and then of course I knew quite a few people who were taking it as well, so it was like ok like join the club. So it wasn’t. I didn’t feel too bad on that.

I was worried before I took them that I would become divorced from reality’ like you don’t care about anything. But I don’t think it really is like that. Perhaps if you took a high dose, but I don’t think it is. Despite the side-effects, for me it was the right thing to do. I actually felt happier that it worked, because it proved to me that what I had been suffering was a physical thing. Chemicals in my brain. And you spend years with people saying, “Oh, cheer up love, why are you so miserable?” And you’re thinking it is not my fault. But you are made to feel it is your fault. The fact that these tablets helped me, I thought there was something going on with my serotonin. I felt vindicated. But after a while, I realised it sorted out my brain chemistry, but you have learnt all these negative ways of looking at things, and doing things’ you’ve learned this behaviour, from your parents at times. And that is why I believe I need long term therapy as well. I felt better, but I still didn’t have ways of dealing with things. The tablet helps you to be more positive, but in other ways’ for example, I find it easier becoming friends with men, but I find it hard to make friends with women. But there is no tablet for that’ I still have a total inferiority complex. I think I am right, but I also think I am wrong. I hold myself back’ I know I am good at my work, but another part of me thinks I’m crap’.

I went for counselling between like ’83 and ’86, it was 3 years almost. There were occasions when I felt [pause] it was very helpful because I was going there and talking about things that were going on at the time… that were troubling me. And having that space to talk made me feel better afterwards; that I’d come away and felt a little more confident and lighter. But on the whole, the kind of issues that were going on at the time, I didn’t manage to get anywhere near resolving any of them.

Right well for me the main pressures haven’t really been concerning drugs, socially a couple of my friends have been smoking Weed but it’s not, it’s not a big part of my life, and I’ve never really felt the need to, to, you know, get involved with drugs. And, but when it comes to alcohol there’s definitely, definitely been some pressures and some, you know, experiences that I’ve had. And I guess it kind of started quite early on, probably when I was about fourteen or fifteen, I think that’s around the first time that I was a bit tipsy. and it’s at various people’s house parties, you know, either their parents go away or their parents are quite relaxed about alcohol and teenagers, and you just find yourself being really quite stupid  you find yourself drinking for the sake of getting as drunk as you can as quickly as you can. and there’s a massive panic because obviously you’re underage and so every, you know, there’s not that much alcohol so you’re consuming as much as you can as fast as you can, and you’re not really you’re what, you know, you’re not thinking about what it’s doing to you as a fourteen, fifteen year old you’re just having fun and joining in. And it’s you, you get, you get really silly with it you just, I mean I think when I was fifteen you find a bottle of Pimms and you think this is great’ and you just drink it neat and it’s not fun . But it’s okay it’s alcohol so you’re joining in I guess .

Well it’s a  we got this word peer pressure I guess but it’s funny it’s not like everyone else is saying, Go on drink, drink, why aren’t you joining in?. It’s kind of like you want to join in, it’s fun, it’s something new, but you just, you’re not thinking really about what it’s doing to you as a fourteen year old you know? So I guess that’s really my first experiences of alcohol. And then you kind of grow up a bit, maybe , and you kind of perhaps are more, are starting to be more responsible with alcohol, you know?

I don’t come from the kind of background that goes to therapy. Therapy is anathema in my family, you know you just, were not from that world, were not from’ that class. And so it took a hell of a lot for me to go to therapy. You know A’ nutters go to therapy, B’ therapy makes you a nutter. These were the kind of things that I grew up with. And it doesn’t help. You know, so hostile kind of lower middle class sort of feeling about that sort of thing. Were not the sort of people that do it, do you know what I mean, it’s like people from Hampstead go to therapy, we don’t. I was sent to the counselling at university, and I fucking hated that, it was probably just the wrong time of life. The sort of walking in, and you’re surrounded by pale skinny fucking anorexics you know and you think A’ I’m a bloke, B’ I’m not one of you lot. I’m sorry I’m voicing what I felt then, I’m not saying what I feel now. You know, I looked around the room and there was these sobbing anorexics and I’m just thinking fuck you, you know what am I doing here? And you get in there and theres the little box of tissues and you just think oh piss off. And, “How did you feel?” and all that stuff, that’s how I felt it was just like my whole thing was completely negative about it. So you can see where I was coming from. It’s not easy for blokes, especially not blokes from that kind of background. You know if you’ve got parents who’ve been through this stuff then it’s alright, I’m not sure many people have, but I can still access the kind of hostility I felt then. So it was hard first of all to get over the thing. But I liked the therapist, she was good, and I felt it was practical, it wasn’t about saying oh yeah I really feel your pain. I think again, getting over your prejudice is extremely important. It was actually about problem solving and at first it was about, “Okay what can we do about this?” And we did talk about experiences, I accessed you know, I don’t know what her method was, I’m not really interested, but we talked a lot about childhood experiences and we, I definitely, it sounds clichd but I did reconnect the pain that I felt as a child, and that I hadn’t properly processed or hadn’t been told it was okay. That was incredibly powerful and it hurt a hell of a lot. I tended to lead it wherever I wanted to go you know. I found it very good, I quite like, I like talking, it makes me feel better. It was nice to be paying someone [laughs] a lot of money to talk.

But I was working for consultant physicians who got me in. So I had a helping hand. If I was anybody, maybe I wouldn’t have got it. I mean I know very few people in all these years who have had psychotherapy. I don’t know what the criteria [are] for choosing who has it, who doesn’t. I know there are very long waiting lists. I know people wait for 3 years, and 3 years is a big chunk out of somebody’s life. It’s just very sad… you know, because I do believe that whilst medication helps people keep going, it’s not necessarily the answer. But then again that comes from two schools of thought. You’ve got your psychologists, you’ve got your psychiatrists. Psychiatrists are quite happy to write you a prescription for medication. And perhaps that’s when they believe there is a chemical imbalance in the brain, which is OK, I can go along with that… Your psychologist is probably going to say, it’s events in your life, it’s things that have happened, or what is happening… Let’s put the two together, you know, they can go hand in hand. But because there are so few psychotherapists, because it is so expensive, you know, even within the health system it’s expensive because of the time.

Yeah as a young person you would be like if I was involved with drugs the potential punishment and consequences of being involved with drugs are so much worse than those of alcohol, so it’s a, you know, I would go and drink instead because if you get caught drunk or drinking underage what do you get? You know, a slap on the wrists, the Police call your parents, not good, admittedly no-one wants to be in the situation but it would seem like the consequences would be less severe so it, yeah that’s probably why people drink more I think, and the availability potentially of alcohol is easier than drugs but then I wouldn’t really know because I’m not looking for drugs .

And I don’t think theres enough help. You get your bad days, and you need to talk to somebody and it’s…. you need to talk to somebody instead of talking to the wall. And so that’s how it is basically. I don’t think theres enough help out there and enough understanding of it because… I don’t know if it is just depression, or you need help… and you have the bad day, maybe I suppose if you was in a relationship, and you could talk to somebody, then when you go home it might help, I don’t know. But sometimes you do need to talk to somebody who you don’t know, who understands, instead of chatting to the brick wall. And instead of it going round in your head and trying to sort it out. Or you need somebody to talk to you and push the right buttons to help sort yourself out, basically, yeah.

You could be paying ’30 to ’40 an hour if you do it privately. You probably talk at the moment probably an average of ’20 an hour, but I guess it’s about making. I mean the way you have to view it because I found I mean the girl that recommended it to me, she was paying ’20 odd an hour. She was on a very low income. And you have to make a sacrifice because the counselling is, it’s a really’ I can’t flag it up enough, say enough how valuable it is. How important’ and yes it might be expensive, especially for people who are on benefits, but it’s about making an investment for your lifetime. And you think, without, you know, without some sort of. maybe you’re going to spend a few hundred pounds on it. But in the long term, you know, in a few years time, you may well be able to return to work or whatever or even if you don’t return to work, it’s just that whole sense of [sigh] just self the realisation, the acceptance of yourself, your ability to move on in life, to understand it, to have the knowledge base there to accept, yes I am a depressive or I do experience depression, but this is what I know. This is how I need to move on. So I mean for me it wasn’t that much.

When I was growing up? well the thing is, I think it’s very different now from growing up now than when my parents were young obviously, because you have things like the internet, social networking, mobile phones, you know, meeting up with your friends, organising things is just so much easier and so when you’re with your friends you will be together and drink and whatever so I think perhaps, and the cultures change as well there’s this teenage, there’s, going out, there’s, you know, I think it’s all been built up a bit more so I think it’s, they do talk to me about it, I mean you know alcohol has always, it’s been in the house and it’s fine, it’s not really been an issue, but I think that perhaps parents aren’t best educated about where young people are at now, and what it’s like to be a young person now, and that’s another thing that maybe could change.

There was never a sit down talk, Let’s talk about alcohol. To be honest I think there was, not naivety but just not an awareness of what a social life meant at sixteen, you’re growing up much faster and earlier than you, you know, ever have done before and maybe they didn’t understand as much, they do now I mean I’ve talked to them about it it’s fine. I shared, you know, what went on and all that, but I think at the time they weren’t aware as much of what was going on, and I don’t, I don’t know if the best thing would have been, like I don’t think saying, Oh you can’t go out anymore. I know it’s, you know you’re going to go to a park and drink a bottle of wine, whatever, I don’t think that necessarily would have worked it just would have caused a lot of resentment, but I think just being, instead being there for you if you need them, is what, it’s that I think is the parent’s role that’s what it needs to be.

I went in there, very defensive, very, I’m not going to talk about anything, I’m not going to explain anything, I’m not gonna, you know, give her the answers. If she wants to get this out of me shes going to have to try bloody hard. I’m very stubborn. But the fact that she got beneath my surface in the space of an hour and got more out of me in an hour than a friend would get out of me in a year, shocked me. Because she hadn’t really done it, I had. Yeah, I was learning, and as much as she [the counsellor] was learning from me, I was learning trying to understand myself a bit more. That I couldn’t always carry off a confident face, a fa’ade. I carried this face around for as far as I’m concerned, twenty four years, this false pretence of being somebody that I actually am not. Because I believed it to be what other people expected. That’s what’ I was a character that everybody, that I thought everybody wanted me to be. I was a bubbly, lively person. I was probably one of the people you would never have thought suffered from depression. And, mainly because I hid it. And I hid it so well that it came natural to me. That, I wouldn’t necessarily open up to anybody. So, although it was all bottling up inside me, I’d had this session and I found some things come out that I wouldn’t talk to my best friend about.

Then of course when you start to talk about the intimate details of your problems, you do sort of get upset and everything. And you know it’s horrific. I find myself telling her things I’ve never put into words before. And she was coming back, ‘Well, you’re saying such and such, you’re blaming yourself for this situation. And the way she put it made me think, ‘Oh, perhaps I wasn’t as much at fault, perhaps only partly, perhaps somebody else was responsible for part, at least part of this situation. And that was tremendous, it really was. I mean, and this’ when did I last see her, possibly a year ago and I’ve not gone backwards. Yes, she really has resolved one or two issues with me.

Yeah they are on the journey and I think that’s its safe because they’re on a journey that you are on, and they are with you every step of the way sort of thing. And you don’t have to talk. Sometimes you can just, by not saying anything you are saying heaps, you know, so it’s yeah. But then also they’re [laugh] the downside is that once you’ve been seeing your counsellor for so long and you’ve built this wonderful relationship you’re in.then you’ve got to have an ending and that’s quite scary’ is when you think, oh my gosh I’m not going to be seeing this counsellor anymore. “Who am I going to off-load it onto? Who am I? ” And it’s the same with, within families that become dependent on, doctors, nurses, social workers. There can be a dependency culture where you think, well actually I don’t want to be going alone, because that’s what you’ve got to do at the end of the day. You have to take that step and you have to brave it on your own.

I was feeling suicidal. I was also quite violent at times. I mean in my own doctor’s surgery, I swept all the things off his desk you know. I mean I did realise I was really ill when they called for an ambulance to take me into mental hospital. The same time there was a part of me, kind of watching what I was doing’ saying, “Right, well make it really dramatic.” I wasn’t pretending exactly, but I knew I had to make a song and dance to get heard.

You cannot relax at all, and I would lie there while this tape was droning on about relax your left knee, your left fist and blah, blah, blah. And I would be lying there like, you know like this…. inside all the time just thinking I hate this. I just want to get out. And then I would feel a failure because I couldn’t do [laugh] relaxation exercise. And that again was very ill matched help. And now if I am feeling a bit tired and tense I can lie on the bed for ten minutes and kind of do a quick skim through of a relaxation exercise and it helps because I’m at a point where it does help, but to force it on people when they are very ill is completely counter productive.

What I’ve come to believe is that anger is the tool which people have been given in order to heal themselves and what anger is for is to keep out of your system, or expel from your system, something that shouldn’t be there. You know, for instance if somebody is…they get too close to you, then you feel anyway so you tell them to get further away. Well that’s natures way, it’s giving you the energy to do that. But where anger can be misused when’ but I’ve learned that it can be used in a very constructive way, and I’ve used it to get hatred and anger actually out of my system.

Well a concrete example is okay I, I’ve because my mother had a lot of distorted religious ideas, when I’m in church, and I go to church quite often, this feeling comes over me of the stupidity of the Christian religion and a hatred of the other people in the pews with me because they, they’re sort of buying it. But I’m’ but I’m aware of that happening. What I do is I turn the anger that I feel sort of boiling up inside me against the concept about life which I think is partly a religious one which I don’t believe in. For instance, God wants you to be miserable and I see those words upon like a signboard and mentally I throw things at the, at the board [laughs] and I let the anger sort of go in the direction of this idea. I say to myself, “That’s a lie, it’s a damned lie,” [laughs]. And I imagine myself with a big axe chopping the board up and this sort of thing. Of course it’s quite easy to stand in church or anywhere, nobody is aware of all this stuff going on. But what I’ve found is that it has a magical effect. At first when I did it all it did was it sort of relived the feeling of anger a bit, but now it very quickly, well it makes space for me to just think of these people that are in the church as people, and clear of that [distorted religious belief].

Do things that make you feel better, like I found that swimming really, really helps me. It’s very therapeutic. I think it’s the repetitiveness of movement and also it helps your breathing, and also it’s a different element. It sort of takes you, being in the water or submerged… or just…. its just a completely different element, its takes you away from your usual surroundings. You know, you hear all these comparisons about you know, the reason people like it is because it takes them back to the womb etc. I’ve heard that being used before, especially the feeling of being under water. I know the sound is all muffled and its just you know, its…. releases the endorphins, obviously the good, the feel good hormones etc. And after I found I now use it, it’s my main tool for stress relief, I can often go in feeling terrible and come out feeling fine. Which was very, very common during depression and I’d go to the swimming pool and I’d go in, in the foulest of moods, and I’d come out feeling light, happy, relaxed. And it’s absolutely brilliant. I’ve even sometimes used it to take out aggression, so if I’m feeling very, very angry then that just reflects in the speed in which I swim. And you know, if I’m, if I’m feeling really bad, then I’ll swim very fast and I’ll do…. so instead of doing 20 lengths, I’ll do 30, and until I feel that, that actually feel that weight lifted off.

And I came across this [community centre] and I saw something saying ‘Spiritual Healing and it wasn’t on that day, so I went there and I made an appointment. And I think I had about 5 treatments, 5 sessions of this spiritual healing and I found it very comforting and very, I mean the whole thing I mean just I think you have to believe that, otherwise I wouldn’t be there. So I do believe and I did believe, so that’s why I went, and I had had seen these things in Brazil and with the kind of physical problems and like stomach ulcers it did work in a way that drugs did not work at the time. So I went there and I told them I’m depressed blah, blah, blah. And I don’t know if you know how it works, but I mean I closed my eyes and this person just, it’s all energy and sometimes I could feel the hands but they didn’t even touch me. And I used to’ I mean the days I had or when I was having it, I left there kind of relieved and light and feeling much better, not that I think that would cure ones depression, but it gives you a kind of momentary relief. Yeah, it made me feel lighter and I also tried, I have a friend who gives Johrei, and one day she came here and she, she gave me one treatment and it was also very this one there is touching you know, it’s almost like, I think she did more in my head and my back but there this one you have some physical touching, and also again it’s through energy and if the person’s not touching you, you feel the heat and oh, so those 2 treatments I thought they were kind of very useful in a kind of giving you some relief. And I think even in terms of sleeping I think the days I had the healing, the spiritual healing, I think I felt, I think it’s almost like feeling, feeling nourished in your spirit and yeah, so I thought it was very useful.

Now, the interesting thing is, on the day that I went there, I was feeling not quite so bad, because by this stage I was on a different drug. I’d been on the tricyclics, I’d been on the paroxetine, which was an SSRI. I was now on one which is in a class of it’s own, venlafaxine. Because it was working on the noradrenaline as well as the serotonin and a- I think that’s what of course I’d been needing the whole time. With the adrenaline that was all around my body. That’s my theory. So, I was on that but I wasn’t fully well just yet. But I was, it was one of my better days. And, I had two friends tuning in at a spiritual level to what I was doing, and other people around the country, probably praying for, thinking of me at the time. And within a very short time, I began to get much better. I had one more severe dip down, for a short time, well, two or three weeks. And then, by the beginning of December, I really was getting better, and didn’t look back.

Yes, it (Fish Oils) didn’t help immediately. I guess it must have taken about six weeks to build up. But I’d say there was a definite lifting of mood. It may have happened in time, but I, I think there was some link there. And the fact that the doctor says it can help with prevention of future depression is incredibly important to me. It gives me a greater feeling of confidence that I have some control over the depression coming back.

That’s right, that’s right. I think that I – that this has been a journey, and I’ve learned a lot about what caused the depression, and along the way, ways of coping with the depression, so I have more control over it coming back, and if it does, how to handle it.

Probably about 3 years ago maybe, I can’t remember why but I went, for a while I went to a hypnotherapist. And, you know, it’s just luck basically, but I think he was really good and because I have kind of anxiety and stuff as well, he basically helped me to, you know, you learn how to do relaxation and all that sort of thing. I mean, to be honest, since I stopped going I can’t do the relaxation stuff any more, but hed learned how to do sort of cognitive stuff as well and he was surprising. Actually, he managed to make me realise a lot more things than any of the other things that I’d done. Even though, like theoretically, it’s a totally different thing and it’s not necessarily supposed to be all about. Well I’m not sure what it’s supposed to be about, but you know, it’s all about trying to make you less anxious and stuff. But he sort of’ I think a lot of these things are just down to the individual person, and how good they are, or how you get on with them. And he just seemed to come up with quite sensible ideas about it. And I think partly, if you’re doing hypnotherapy, it’s like you know the aim is to get a kind of release of your subconscious, and go down and teach your subconscious better things. But also, if you’re doing that you’re visualising stuff, and so if you say this is what I’m visualising, they go, ‘Oh right, so you’re seeing things like that and maybe you should see it like that. And I think that really, even though theres no way, I can’t do it now, and I should have you know, but I’ve totally forgotten it all. I’ve taken things away from that, that now there is a little bit of a little voice in my head whereas before I’d just been like, ‘Oh, everything’s really terrible and I can’t do this, I can’t do this. Theres at least a little voice in my head going, well actually maybe you can. And you know, that’s a big change for me.

I call, what I’ve got in my head my chatter box. Basically it is my mind, seeing things a particular way. And with depression you see it really negatively. You see everything negatively, you’ll always pull out the negative over the positive if you ever see a positive, you’ll. if for one positive you’ll give ten negatives. And that little voice in your head, that’s telling you, oh God, you know, that person doesn’t like me, or oh, I don’t look very good today, or I feel fat or, you know, all these horrible negative things that come into your mind are your chatter box telling you all these frightful things.

I seemed to be concentrating on the big things, really, almost possibly as a distraction from myself. But I felt like, again my own needs weren’t that important, really. If somebody had some kind of emotional problem my attitude was probably that it’s not a real problem, it’s not the same problem as people starving in the Third World, and that’s kind of how I felt about myself. I felt okay, I’m not enjoying life a lot, I find most of it very boring, possibly that’s because I’m quite bright, and I don’t have that much to fill up my time or that much stimulation. But it was a kind of gradual slide from about the age of 10, I think, into something that was depression. I was about, I was standing in a dinner queue at school once, on my own, and somebody comes up behind me and he said, ‘You know, you radiate depression. Which was, at the age of 13, was quite [laughing]’ It was also a funny turn of phrase and I think I probably laughed actually, but somehow I’d picked up that something was wrong.

It’s almost you’ve got this voice, and it is a voice sometimes of just’ that has this incredible power of right about it. And no matter what you try and do, sometimes you just think okay I’ll argue with it, that exhausts you. Sometimes you think I’m not listening, I’m not listening, not listening, almost like you know when kids sort of put their fingers in their ears and try and pretend something that goes away’Getting better is about thinking no that’s [thinking is] wrong actually, and moving on, it’s not about fighting. Fighting you have to do sometimes. I’ll tell you, there are some moments when you’re depressed and you say, “Oh right, yeah, oh well I can probably live with that, you now I can live with the rest of my life being shit basically, you know that’s fine, I can get on with that.” And you have this sort of and you think’ you think well that’s the good times, you know you think, ‘Oh yeah, okay. But theres other times when you sit there sort of going, ‘No, no, no. And that is really hard. The thing I remember. and it was the beginnings of getting better because you try it many, many times and it doesn’t work, you have to stick with it. It’s not so much that wrestling, because when you are alright of course you’re not wrestling, you just go “No, actually that’s wrong.” And’ it never even comes to mind that’s health. Theres a sort of intermediate phase where they come, but you just bat them away quite easily, no great fuss.. But I think you have to’ you do have to sort of fight a bit. But it’s tiring and sometimes you just want to give up you know, and just say, ‘Okay have it your way, yes that’s right actually. And that’s really not nice, not nice at all.

And whilst initially (after starting antidepressant medication) I started feeling better. I then started feeling, I started feeling depressed again and I started feeling, essentially because I’d got my capacity of thought back, I started feeling introspective. In the, before then really I’d lost the capacity. I just think I was a zombie and I started feeling, I started sort of thinking again and started thinking that, Well, actually yeah the world would be a better place without me. Then, I think my family would be better off without me. You know, because of the life insurance, think of life insurance and they’ll be more secure then you know. If I did lose my job I’d be unemployed

It’s [pause] I always try to think that theres a sort of beneficial flip side to these problems. And I tell myself that if you don’t hit the bottom, you don’t really know what the good things are. So when I felt absolutely as if I’d hit the rock bottom, it was starting then to feel quite joyful because I knew it was going to get better, and gradually it did’

But I see myself as having…through experience, experiencing it myself, having got better and able to cope with it, even though if you get depressed you always still, you still really kind of believe that this is it, and it’s really bad, but at the back of your mind at least you know that it’s going to get better at some point. And I have become more positive, and I don’t know if that’s just something to do with gaining experience in life and actually doing things, and so becoming slightly, you know more confident. I mean, nowadays when I talk to people and meet people, sometimes I say, Oh, I don’t feel, I’m not very confident and whatever. And they go, Well, that’s funny because I really thought that you wer. So I’ve become a lot better, I think at presenting a better face to the world, and not kind of so obviously, like just withdrawn and introverted. And you know, partly that’s just growing up, I think and just kind of gaining in experience, and just being less, slightly less, you become less self-conscious after a while.

And just, I remember nights you know, I couldn’t sleep and I’d bemy mind would be really buzzing and racing. Somebody would tell me they’d been depressed and they feel sort of dead and numb. I never felt that. My depression is always about your mind zooming into miserable places, never aboutome people say to me when I’m depressed I just, I can’t feel anything. That’s not my experience, it’s just about racing. I remember lying in my bed and it would be, I can kind of see it you know [laughs] the light on the landing, and it would be getting later and later and later and I couldn’t sleep and I’d be crying and I’d be upset and then my parents would say, "Well what’s wrong?" you know, they’d take me into their bedroom and sit with me.

I think one of the analogies he used first off was, if I was walking down the street and somebody came walking towards me that I knew, and I knew well, but that they looked away and walked past me, how would I feel. And I said, "Well, you know, oh my God, you know, what have I done?" Or trying to remember the last time I met them, I mean what had I said. You know, feeling guilty that it was obviously my fault. It would never have crossed my mind as he would suggest, as he suggested to think that the person might well have had things on their mind, may not actually have seen me, may have been distracted by something else…..And I, I saw for the first time, other people had other issues that were quite separate from me…..And it made me realise over a period of time that….if something happened that I felt unhappy about [pause], I only saw it from one angle.

Because when I’m depressed I’ I wasn’t able to do anything about it, really. I just felt overwhelmed by it. And so you do have to just tackle the bit that you can get a grip on, and it might be something very small. And with my depression, when I was feeling very low, I would, I did decide to just concentrate on small things; going for a walk, baking some bread, you know pottering around in the garden. Just trying to get through day to day, I think, was how I came out of the suicide attempt. And that lasted a long, long time, really and I don’t think it can be rushed, that recuperation really. And then I spent some time working on a farm, actually, which was quite good because there was the exercise and the fresh air, and there was also the camaraderie of other people who thought it was a crap job as well. So, you know. not doing anything too demanding. It might almost seem common sense to people that if you distract yourself from some of these things, it might give a bit of relief. That actually in the long term, if you keep doing it, it’s a good way of slowly coming out of depression. But yes, it might seem common sense, but it’s not what you feel like doing all the time, not at all.

I remember once I. when’ in my second episode I had when I was about seventeen’And I remember a particular time, it was a hard time, it really was a hard time. The day that I suddenly felt things picked up, I wanted to do something, I wanted to do something physical. I’d been told, my doctor said to me, “You’re not allowed to read any books, you’ve got to do just physical things.” So I started to garden, I’ve never been in the garden before. And it was crap at first, but gradually it was alright, you know you start to think, ‘Yeah, this is kind of distracting me a bit. And there was one day I remember having my Walkman on [laughs] and I was trying to listen to a record, I can’t even think what it was now, and of course the bad stuff comes, the bad thoughts come. And I remember the first time that I felt, ‘Oh, I’m winning here.’And for the first time I felt hey, this fighting is working. People tell you to do things, they say in this case you know, work in the garden. And you do it the first few times and you just think, ‘Oh fuck off, this isn’t going to work. And strangely, these sort of laborious tasks do begin to work, so you have to stick at it.

Just one other thing really that’s been really very’ that I feel is very important for anybody is the ability to express feelings.. If you can try and express yourself. And it can be in a variety of ways because I do it in a variety of ways, in ways that I found out I didn’t even know I could.

Such as poetry. I wrote a poem when I was in hospital, and it literally flowed out of me. I wrote it and a couple of people have read it. I’ve written lots more since. And it’s been a good way of getting these feelings out.For me writing it’s a good way of putting something down in black and white that sometimes is very difficult to express in words. When somebody says to you, ‘How do you feel?’ sometimes it is difficult to say, to sum it up in a few sentences, how you do feel. You know it’s a mind body thing. Sometimes you feel things in your body that you just can’t express. So I would encourage anybody to do whatever they feel comfortable with doing, whatever their means are to express themselves, whether it be music, dancing, or something, or screaming or getting in to the car and having a good shout is a good thing because nobody can hear you when you are driving along in your car. Let it out because if it doesn’t come out, it gets stuck, I think. And it builds up and builds up and you get full and you get full of all these feelings that have never been expressed.

But this was the very first poem I wrote and it came straight from the heart so it will always be my fondest poem [laugh]. Would it be alright for me to read it? It’s actually called Black bird on my Shoulder. I think this came, maybe came from a lot of people who called depression like a ‘Dog and that came from Winston Churchill. But for me it felt like a black bird that always sat on my shoulder and was with me all of the time. But I will read the poem.
Black bird on my shoulder
Screeching in my ear
Nobody else will listen
He has been there year after year
Black bird on my shoulder
Crying me to sleep
Whispering to me
Give it up
No tears now left to weep
Black bird on my shoulder
Daring me cross that line
Into madness I surrender
Oh insanity, how divine
Black bird on my shoulder
Didn’t think I’d come this far
Where do I go to now I plead?
Wading through this thick black tar
Black bird on my shoulder
Please, please just fly away
One more chance just give me
Just give me one more day.
So I guess in a kind of although I was in a very deep dark depression at the time I was still kind of asking in the very last sentence, ‘Give me one more day. Give me, you know, give me something. Somebody help.”

If I’d be in a certain mindset I think with ketamine especially, ketamine’s a very addictive drug. But it seems now like for me out of all the drugs I think cannabis and and ketamine; I can’t really remember why I used to like them. They just, just seems very strange when I see people out who are sort of, I don’t know, sort of smoking like weed and stuff who are still doing it now and then people who are really into ketamine and just like a complete mess on the floor it just seems it’s not a good look, it’s not for me I don’t know why I got into that but that’s just like I said earlier it’s just escapism. It’s just very much your own self destruct mode, what else can I like how much else can I like how much like can I get it out of my system like it’s like sort of agressional whatever, it is that’s on your mind and then ketamine is that, is definitely that drug. Because like I said a little bit earlier like it’s almost like your dreaming like while you’re awake and sort of detaches your like because your part almost like you can’t really move that or speak that much and like you’re dreaming you’re having all these visual thoughts and it’s like, it’s like very much it’s a very like weird kind of drug and it’s very hard to explain unless you’ve actually taken it. But it’s from an outside perspective looking at someone who’s on it, it looks disgusting because you’re just like you’re just a mess but like the person what they’re seeing is like a dream like the visuals that are going in front of them and like they’re almost like I don’t know I’ve taken that drug and I’ve thought I was on holiday and stuff like that it’s just bizarre like it’s a very weird drug but… And it’s a different drug if you take a tiny bit than if you take a massive amount of it because if you only take a massive amount of it you go into this k hole state and that’s when you’re sort of like dreaming while you’re awake whereas if you take a tiny bit it’s just like bubbly sort of drug and your.

I have to say its not often now that I get…it’s not often now do I get an experience which indicates to me that I’m going to lapse back into it. I’d no history of depression before this came along. If I find myself getting very tired, I take that as a warning’Well I think you see, if your brain has had a battering, it needs time and rest to recover you know. If you’re awake you’re not resting it, and I think that’s what happened, I think you know this detachment, the brain was saying, ‘I’ve got too much overload I want to chill out’, as it were, “I want, I want ‘out’ of this”, you know.

The warning signs for me are I don’t listen, I can’t listen to music or television. I can’t bear noise. I’m very intolerant of any noise. Any kind of noise at all, and I take to my bed. Or I isolate myself. I stop answering the phone, before that something must happen before that. Just generally feeling things aren’t right. Something is wrong somewhere. Intuition. Somethings wrong. Somethings not right. I don’t feel at ease with myself. I don’t really want to be with myself. If I could get drunk. I haven’t turned to drink. I have drugs, I have used my medication to get myself off my head sometimes, sleeping tablets. I’ve taken four or five sometimes to just release myself. And it’s the same thing as getting drunk. You kind of need to lose yourself because you can’t bear to be with yourself anymore. I’m not really sure what that’s about but.

The signs (of depression) are panic, yeah you just think “I’m panicking.” And that’s physical, you know your heart rate goes up, the old classics of waking up early in the morning, that happens, the fear of being on your own, that you recognise. And just the sheer onslaught of negative thoughts that you just can’t push out. And then you know, you know when it’s coming, you know this is a bit different from just feeling shit. You know I have crap days, you can come home from work, and you think, “Oh shit, that was awful, I feel crap.”And you know, maybe you’ve got some kind of material problem in your life, we all have them you know that’s different, theres a very different’ Quality, a panicky quality, a dark kind of it’s a very different texture that kind of anxiety from. and depression from the kind of stuff that we deal with every day, or you know sometimes you have a couple of days of feeling, ‘God, I didn’t feel that great last week. But you know it’s very different from what.. yeah that, when you see it coming I think, I remember saying to myself, “Oh no, not again.” Really you know, I know, I’ve got over this once, surely, I thought I was over it and it’s back. Now if it happened to me again, which I dare say it will, I’ll never think, “Oh God, I thought I was out of that”, because I think I’ve kind of accepted that it is something that’s there now. And people will say oh how sad that is, and I don’t think it is really, without saying yeah it’s something that’s there, but I know the signs, and I know what to do, and I know you get better.

You know in the best of moments, I can do more than somebody who hasn’t been brushed with the madness stick. You know, I have, sort of, my art that I do, I like writing music, I’ve made films, I make animations, I write software in my spare time. I can do lots of things and you know, when I go through the things that I do in my spare time, people look at me as if I’m mad. Yeah, probably am, but you know, this is madness in a positive sense in I can pull the energy that’s within me to doing something positive and doing something creative. But I do feel that every good day has to be paid for by a bad day, and yeah, sooner or later it catches up with you. And that’s when you get depressed and you have to be aware of that and sometimes I have to make a conscious decision. Why get engrossed in a project and stop going to bed at bedtime? Making sure I don’t miss meals, you know, make sure that I don’t get up at three o’clock in the morning because I’ve got this crazy idea that won’t go away. You know, stay in bed, get up at a sensible time and yeah, I have to look after myself like that or. I believe when I’m on a high, I’ll lose it, and I will lose my grounding in reality.

Yeah I could then see this cyclical pattern, it was like being on a scenic railway you know. You’d drop down into the depths and then hit the heights. The heights were very good for thinking up schemes, and some of them were a bit over the top maybe, but I got to use it if that’s the right thing. It sounds as if I’m so clever, but at the time I didn’t feel it. But I was able to use it to my advantage and trim it to suit the situation, and I’d quite a lot of drive and I could get people to become enthusiastic about doing certain things and it worked very well for me. And then I thought, well that’s the easy part. It’s the depression is the bit that’s difficult, and I then began to notice sort of [pause] forerunners if that’s the right expression, little things that would tell me that the depressed state was about to start. So I was then able to increase some of the anti-depressants. After yes. after recovering if you like.. but there were still periods when instead of being like this in the swings [motions with his hands a roller coaster ride] it’s more like that it’s manageable [motions with his hands a much flatter roller coaster], and it’s got to the point where the depression is a feeling of being just fed up, plus a fraction. But not the absolute withdrawal, that’s. that’s ghastly. That is awful. So that’s something I’ve experienced.

Well with some sort of experience of it, when you’ve had about six goes, depressed for two years, okay, depressed at least by then you know I did get better. Whilst I was depressed the thought of ever getting better was the last thing on earth, desperation of just living through a day was. it was that desperate you know at times. And that’s how I bumped along, with recurring bouts about two years depression, three years okay. It’s just my life has been bouts of depression and fairly good, and then another bout of depression. And I was warned that my particular sort of depression would follow that kind of path. So you can’t be for, forearmed against it, if it’s down to you, you’ll get it. What you’ve got to be able to do is accept it, and accepting it seems to be able to make it manageable.

I stopped myself from doing things because I didn’t think there was any point in doing it, and because I was afraid that I might get embarrassed about something. And I realised that. you know there were only so many opportunities you’re presented with in life, and therefore you have to seize the day and try and take those opportunities, so long as they’re not overwhelming. And that’s how come I ended up, you know doing, going out and meeting some friends who were interested in the same kinds of things I was. And beginning to develop a bit. a bit more of a social life, a bit more of a normal social life, I think’

I have to say now, you know, you can see the benefits are… that you put your life into perspective, you try and look at what is more important. Things that you really forgot about, you know, reasons for, other reasons for being on this planet basically [laughs] other than just spending 24 hours, 7 days a week, working for what reason at the end of the day. Making you stop and have time for friends I suppose as well. And the hardest part is trying to get this time, relaxing time for me, which I find very hard and I still have to learn that because I’m not easy to relax, I find it very difficult to relax. To sit down like this now is probably the [laughs] longest I have ever sat down but it’s set in my mind, I’m saying, “I have to get up and do this, I’ve got to get up and do that”, and now, “you’ve got to sit here and do this”, you know and more. I suppose, more, more time in my home as well, which I didn’t… and more time to like enjoy things that are free, like watching the sky, or the birds, the trees. I think you really appreciate those sort of things more and I appreciate that fact that, you know, I love trees and I’ve watched trees in the last two years and I could never watch trees in my life before. And because I’ve watched them I can draw them, whereas before I used to draw branches in the wrong directions and then suddenly I’d look at trees and thought, “They don’t, that’s not like that, it’s like this”, you know. I’ve looked at trees and I’ve watched the way they’ve changed over a period of months, especially when I was in hospital and related to it in a way of life and so I appreciate nature much more.

And one of the things I found really helpful was to work out what, what I really needed, when I was very depressed. What I really wanted, how I wanted to live and, and use it like a mantra every day, because I understand that we can train our subconscious minds to… to go the way we want them to go by teaching them what we want them to be. And so everyone has to do it for themselves. And, and mine was, when I was really depressed, mine was, “I’m calm, cheerful and creative”. And I, when I walked anywhere, I would say that over and over and over, not necessarily out loud in case people thought I was quite mad, but I would say it out loud if, if there was no one around, but certainly in my mind, “I’m calm, cheerful and creative”. And you formulate, you work out what you want to be, how you want your life, to live your life, what’s important to you, and retrain your consciousness and you…when you’re depressed you’re in a state where you can’t aim for anything, you can’t do anything, but you can do that I think. I know you can because I did it.

And I suppose I’ve been doing’ in the last five years I’ve been doing sort of courses with an organisation called The Landmark. They are really clear it is not an alternative to therapy, its for people who want to take a very cognitive based look at their lives, identify what’s going on, and create things in their lives that work better than the things that they’re doing at the moment. At its simplest what happens is there is you look at life, they have a way of describing the mechanics of life as we experience it. There are a series of…. if you like, tendencies that humans have, you know a tendency to not take responsibility, a tendency to blame other people for what’s going on, a tendency to deny what’s going on. A tendency to have ones experiences from the past’To have experiences that worked less than well somehow dictate to your intellect that that’s all going to happen again. My relationship with my father was so bad and so horrible and awful that I just related to it as that’s how it is, you know I breathe, I hate my father’s guts. It was just a given, so I didn’t actually go to the Landmark course thinking I’ll really do some work on my dad, that was landscape. So my first job on picking the phone up during one of the breaks in the course was to say, “Dad, no this isn’t about an argument, I want to talk to you.” You know, kind of I’m…. I just said and this is… I can’t remember how we got there but I knew exactly what I wanted to say to him. I said, “Dad, I’m ringing to apologise for my role in the breakdown in our relationship. There are all sorts of things have happened. And I’ve just related to you in a way that makes it impossible for us to be able to manage each other at all.

When my son started school…I actually went into adult education… to an evening class, which was labelled counselling. But in fact when I went there… it was only 1 evening a week, it was more on… self-awareness. It was a mixed class… and that’s one of the points, that was one of the big turning points around that time. Those classes went on in various forms and another for about 2 years. And we covered some areas which were incredibly painful, and I would sit there thinking, “What am I doing here, why am I putting myself through it.” But in fact, I learned so much it’s… it’s a big part of my journey. Over 2 years I actually had 2 different teachers… both were psychosynthesis trained, which was a method of psychology I’d never come across before. But it was sufficiently interesting to keep me going for 2 years. I met some terrific people in these classes… I suppose we were all on a similar journey, and they were… it was worth going… I wouldn’t go back and undo it.

I think it’s (depression) sort of made me question what I thought was good about my life because I was in a very busy and hard-working career, and whilst the depression wasn’t the main, or the only reason, that I left, there was a re-organisation at my work, I do think, oh, thank God I left there when I was 36 rather than 56. You know, I understand that I need sort of time for me now, and that I’m a person in my own right, and I’m important and I have, you know, the right to have some quality time for me. Whereas perhaps before I didn’t…I might have thought it but I never actually did it. I think it puts things…. sort of life into perspective and you…. some of the sort of silly inconveniences of life you think, whereas before you might have got het up about them, now you just think, well, so? Or, so what? [Laughing]

That there is hope, there is, you know. That isn’t the end. I think your feeling is, “Right”, particularly if you’re ageing you know, “Right that’s the end of my life, that’s the last thing I’ll ever do”, you know. “And all I’m ever going to do now is either retire or whatever”, you know and certainly things change totally, and a lot of things…a lot of opportunities opened up which I would never have thought had happened. Strangely enough there were certain things, practical things that made these things happen. One was a… a friend of mine bought me a mobile phone and that opened up the social side of things, which it hadn’t existed before. So and then the other thing was I started playing around with computer graphic packages, Coral Draw was one I was working in, and I’d started doing kind of abstract art basically using that. So sometimes there can be things that can facilitate things happening, but I think you definitely need to, I mean I started using the phone more than I’d ever used it in the past. So it was a communications thing.

I think with having my daughter that really’ I couldn’t really wallow in self-pity’ I couldn’t afford to be ill for too long. I mean, it was hard. I because I’ve got my partner’ he works and you know with very limited extended family, so it was very much, I’ve got to get up and I’ve got to get on with this. And I just felt it was unfair on my daughter. You know, I didn’t want her to see me ill as well. So I think she you know, got me through it, because it’s like I will get up and, you know, I’ve got. Basically I had to review my life and re-evaluate it and just leave that behind. And I think the biggest thing for me was letting go’like coming to terms with it and actually, you know you can’t do this but you know, it’s ok. And accepting, it’s about accepting. Accepting that for me that it’s ok. I’ve worked all my life. I’ve had a child, blah blah blah’ I can’t, I’m not superwoman let’s just take some time out. ‘

So I think probably for a year I hardly went out of the house. I, there was a ladies group on a local church that I used to make myself go to because I…you know the doctor had said, “You need to get out. You need to exercise”. Which was laughable because I could hardly walk, never mind actually do any exercise. But I made myself get on the bus, go to this meeting. I could just sit there really and not say anything, just be amongst people. Felt like hell [laugh] and came home. And just continued to just be vague about what was wrong with me to people. Fortunately I had changed jobs so I didn’t really have friends who followed me up from the new job because I’d not had a chance to make friends. People from my old job didn’t know what had happened to me because of course I’d left there.

But actually, probably one of the most important things for me that came out of working for [self-help group] is I got interested in the subject of depression for it’s own sake and I started looking at research myself and trying to . I was looking at academic research, I used to go to the British Library and the University of East London and look through journals there. And that made a lot of sense to me. I understood, because I’ve got a background in maths, I can understand all the statistics and basically I found a lot of useful information, for example to do with what happens if you tend to ruminate and things. And I had a very strong tendency to spend. use the time that I had by myself to look inwards and I realised that by doing that and concentrating on the faults, that was actually making me more pessimistic.

Well when my mum found out that I’d been on Seroxat when it happened she referred me to the Panorama website. She told me a little bit about it, but I felt quite sceptical about it because I hadn’t related what had happened to the Seroxat. I’d felt that that was just how my depression had developed. And when I went and read the descriptions other people had given of their experiences on Seroxat, it was absolutely stunning. I was amazed to find descriptions of very similar feelings and physical side-effects that I’d had. And it was, it was a big relief, to feel that maybe it wasn’t just my head being that messed up, maybe there had been this outside influence, and you know, that other people had experienced it and had got better.

As a Christian I believe theres got to be a reason behind everything and I don’t know, I don’t know, I haven’t got to the bottom of that yet, and it may be that I won’t. I thought originally that possibly I was, I was going to be used to help other fellow sufferers. Well, I started off on that track, but when it’ sort of had to fall off. I don’t know, I haven’t yet found the reason for me having the depression, but I don’t fret over it, I think there has to be a reason.

But yes, my, my Christian faith, which I’ve had for, you know well, since baptism of it in practise. It has come into play more when things have been black with depression and all the other unhappinesses. And it’s been a great source of solace because I believe personally that the love of God is there and unchangeable and never goes away no matter what I do. He made me like this. He knew what he was doing. He made me and he loves me. I get myself into scrapes. Other people get me into scrapes but at the end of the day, he is always there. And to take that one stage further although as a gay man the Catholic Church isn’t, is not in favour of homosexuality and views it with some rancour, and views it as a sin… I have never ever had condemnation direct or implicit from a priest or any congregation in any Catholic Church I have ever worshipped in. Far from it, one priest in particular, no in fact all of them in their very different ways from young men to, to much older men, have all of them in their ways been very loving and caring and supportive both to me and my partner through the bad times as well as the good. And yes, they’ve been very loving and very caring in the ways that I think our Lord would have expected. And the cant and hypocrisy of those who condemn, who condemn the sinner out of hand particularly some fundamental religious groups, I think is just appalling.

I think there are a lot of things we actually don’t understand, and up to a point, but probably in depression, the depths of depression, you can’t really do anything about. But prayer does help, and believing that the holy spirit will sustain… that God will not allow us to suffer too much, and will give us the strength to cope. It is often rubbished, but there again, that’s what I believe. I have been sustained. It doesn’t mean I’ve never thought of suicide in the real pits… in the 60’s, in the 1960’s I suppose, there were times when, “I just don’t want to be here anymore, this is so incredibly painful, my life is such a mess… I feel a wreck, I am so unhappy, I am so miserable… What else can there be…” This is particularly in a period of depression that just went on and on and on. I didn’t have faith then, I didn’t even attempt to… I didn’t attempt suicide, it doesn’t mean to say I didn’t think about it.

I mean, even though I didn’t feel it (prayer) was doing me any good. And an image I did use, and I’ve used since to help other people, is of the iceberg in the sun. That although I wasn’t aware that any melting was about to take place, or going to take place, of the iceberg of depression. An iceberg will be melting in the sun, and there will come a point when it’s obvious and it’s visible. And that’s what I held on to, that there would come a point when I would begin to feel less depressed.

And I mean it says in the Bible that all things work together for good for those that love God. And that’s kind of one, that’s a verse that is easy to spout when everything is hunky dory, but when you are going through it, it’s a tough one. And I know when I was really sick I was saying to God, “Look I don’t know what you are trying to teach me by this God but just tell me. Tell me the song then I’ll sing it. Why have I got to go through this? What do you want me learn because whatever it is, tell me, I’ll learn it.” You know, and it was only afterwards I realised that what I felt God wanted me to learn was what it feels like to be clinically depressed for five years because that has been a very helpful thing to sometimes share with people in the right setting. You know when… we can go through horrendous periods of our life, where we look at suicide and think it looks like a good option. We look at everything and think I’ve got nothing and you can come through it. And I’ve got a job now that I could never have done before. I still get a kick when I see a new client thinking I’ve got to build a quick bridge to this person, and get them to tell me about their incontinence or whatever if I’m going to do something to do with their health.

I thought that if there was any sort of God out there, then he wouldn’t have let what’s happened happen to me and my family, and other people that have been through similar experiences. He wouldn’t have taken somebody that really made a good contribution to the world and left somebody that you know caused so much disruption and heartache and you know problems. And, so I suppose I just went against, I went against religion completely. It just literally finished it off for me, and made me think, right ok I do not believe that there is any sort of God out there. But, I had a belief in Karma, and in a sense of what goes around comes around, and theres gotta be a turning point for me somewhere. And something good has got to come out of all this, I can’t let, you know, let all of this, dictate my future for me.

I was very unhappy with Western culture, and when I talk to people in self-help groups, I very often find that a lot of the attitudes that I talk about, I’ve said about, you know wanting to get ahead and have a conventional family life and everything. Everyones got to own car, and all this kind of stuff is just something that I collectively despaired of with other depressed people, that it’s that kind of social brutalisation, almost, and all the expectations. The expectations you have as well, or other people have of you. That really’ you can’t cut yourself off from them because they exist but you can assert your right to be different. Yes, but anyway I’m getting far too philosophical now, I think. And it was quite nice realising that these people did suffer from depression, and yet they were very intelligent and sensitive people. And you know, theres obviously no contradiction between the things but in fact, you know, you spend all that time feeling, looking at other people and I’ve felt I was worse than, you know, I felt I was. and I felt I was missing something. I didn’t have something that the rest of the human race had. But in fact, it turned out almost to be the opposite. That in fact, you know we have a certain sensitivity, I think, being depressed maybe.

I’m saying, I wasn’t the only person who felt that way [laughing]. Well, yes, so it was sort of like self-help groups in the, well it was the Manic Depression Fellowship, a local group, but I think now it’s called Mood Swings Fellowship and they’re not the same. Yeah, I think the ones where you go in person is’ rather than just sort of going out with a group of friends or acquaintances or whatever, if you go to a group for depression, people, you know, a lot of the groundwork is already done, plus you don’t have to make any effort there. You might have somebody who’s not feeling so good one week who doesn’t really, you know, doesn’t…is not able to contribute a lot but it’s nice for them, and it’s not judgmental and you can share experiences, you can just have quite a lot of humour with things.

If people are a bit manic, it can set people off. On the other hand it can also not be very nice for somebody who’s depressed. If you’re depressed you don’t want somebody …who’s high. But there again, if you’re the high person you can’t understand why everybody’s not joining in. But if you have a good facilitator then they can help, which we did, I have to say.

Because the difficulty is Damien that the [support group umbrella] is not a professional body, and these self help groups which are under the umbrella of the [name], none of us are professionals, and there are some pretty intelligent people, but they’re not health professionals. And I have to be a bit careful. I have to be careful leading the group that I’m not, I’m not being a therapist you see. On the other hand, I am being a therapist, I’m using it’ I don’t really want to run a group just to comfort people with depression, I don’t want to. If I wanted to do that, any of them could be the leader of the group if that’s all it is. Because all they do is just meet, swap stories and think well it’s nice being with people that understand. Well of course it is, and it can even be very therapeutic in itself for certain people. But then once they’ve got to that stage, when they’ve had the therapy of just the sympathy, then they need something else. And some of the people in that group are not the sort of people who go to a counsellor for one reason or another, and so I’m determined that I’m going to bring a lot of the techniques that I’ve learned into the group, and offer to them. It’s up to them whether they do anything with them or not, but that’s what I’m going to do.

Well the main distortion in my thinking when I was depressed was about people not liking me which was a huge break through in therapy. Realising that, when I was in depression that I’d even, even doubt, my friends and family they didn’t like me, I thought even my best friend, he, I’ve known him for, since we were both 11 years old, so its almost 20 years, I even convinced myself that he didn’t want to know me anymore. That he thought I was useless and which in reality wasn’t the case at all, you know we love, we love each other deeply, and that’s always been the case.

But basically, my Mum has always experienced depression in a sort of similar way to me, I think. And basically, her response is just to like do it anyway and just kind of, shes always done stuff but she gets really anxious and shed always get really scared but shes done so much. Shes gone travelling and like shes done jobs where she was really scared of it and shell just do it and she doesn’t let things stop her. So I’ve always felt like, yes, theres some things that I haven’t done because I was scared but other things. I refuse to let my, have the depression stop me doing anything so I would never have a day off through being depressed. I would never not do something that I was supposed to be doing because I was feeling depressed.

It’s Christmas funny enough that brings it into sharp focus, because all my friends bar this one have some sort of relationship, families they go to, and now I don’t have that, I don’t have a family, my older relatives are all dead, I don’t have that sort of family connection. And I just had a 50th birthday party last week and 47 people were there. The fact that I counted them all [laughs] is probably instructive actually. I invited about 60 but some people couldn’t come, but a lot of them have partners, not all of them, and sometimes you can feel when you’re, you know, this is a real big thing in depression when you’re single that you’ve failed in some way. And sometimes couples make you feel that you’ve failed, they don’t always do it intentionally.

Yeah I have one friend, who was actually, I actually went to university with, and was there when I was first unwell, so she knows me quite well, and has seen me very low before, so shes you know, stood by me, quite well. And it’s got to the situation now when I can actually acknowledge to her that I do get periods of feeling suicidal and she will actually have that conversation with me, whereas previously that was far too scary. The thought of actually mentioning it, but now that’s out in the open it’s made our relationship a lot stronger, that has. I think what has helped my friend is that shes read a lot about it, shes learned a lot about it, shes been interested. She cuts out magazine articles for me, I’ve lent her books that shes gone away and read. She wants to know more, but at the end of the day, just being there, consistently. Consistently being there, not necessarily asking why, you know, why you’re in this situation, just accepting that this is how you are, and that at some point you may choose to say, ‘This is why I think I have depression. And just really being a friend in that sense.

No. It’s not the primary meaning of it. It’s the, the meaning of it is that I just, just want to be out of it. I want to be away from this and the only way I can solve my problems at the moment is to be, is to remove myself from them. And I suppose, I suppose if you sit and think about it enough then you’ll think about, well, who are you going to leave behind? But I will say, it acts as a comfort for me and it does prevent me.. and I have got very low at times, but I just think, well okay, yeah you can do it, [interviewee name], but do you really want to do it? Is it actually going to solve any of your problems? It’s not going to solve any of them but it’s still my comfort. And I have a friend that understands that way of thinking as well because she feels exactly the same. And obviously.

I think they had to be quite switched on, and to know how to deal with me, because sometimes I would want to sit and talk about how bad I was feeling and, you know, how dreadful life was and all those things. But then sometimes I’d just think, I don’t want to do that… I just want to act normal and sit and have a cup of tea and have a chat about the weather and just not go down that route because I’m just too tired of it all. So, I mean some of them offered to…. to look after my son for me, to baby-sit because we had no one to baby-sit so we… we hadn’t been out for about 6 months because we had no one to look after the baby. So a couple of friends looked after him one night so my husband and I could go out.

This man, in a sort of twilighty evening, this man emerged walking his, his dog, and climbing up from one lock gate to the next, and came upon me standing there solitary in the light. And said, ‘Are you alright?’ He scared me actually to the point that I almost fell in. I mean, but it jerked me back into reality again and, and I stepped back. And he, he didn’t get into conversation with me or anything, but I stepped back and realised you know, that I have, you know, this was really as far as I’d ever gone before. So I got in the car and drove home. And the next day, as I say I had was meeting this friend, and we went for a swim and I admitted, you know, what I’d done the night before and how easy it would have been just to let go. And, she said, “Oh, you know, I think the time has come, you must go and talk to your GP, you must do something about this.” And she actually made me get out of the swimming pool, she made me get dressed and she rang the surgery and made an appointment. And thankfully, you know, I was able to get an appointment that same afternoon, and she waited with me. And actually accompanied me to the surgery. She didn’t go in with me.

No, I feel that [husbands name] felt that there was the focus on me, so I’d got the psychiatrist and the hospital, and as I’ll say later on I did have friends too, and my family. But he felt very isolated and cut off, and hed found it very hard going to work, juggling [son’s name]’s care, and being worried about me. And also because I’d been through it before with the postnatal depression. He just felt that he couldn’t go through it again, and he didn’t have anyone to talk to, so in the end he did go and see a GP because he was concerned that he was going to get depressed as well. And he did pay for some private counselling sessions. And then after six months I came back… yes after six months I came back to live here, and he came back. And we also had some joint sessions, through Relate, to help us deal with the depression together, and the fall out as well on our relationship.

They gave us both a chance to talk properly to one another about our experience of the depression. I think before wed kind of tiptoed round one another really. We were just so scared of it, it just seemed like such a big thing. And I’d also felt very abandoned by him, and very let down, because hes left. But I was able to see through the sessions that… the pressure that hed been under, and why hed found it so difficult. And so we were able to talk through those very difficult emotions and feelings, and thoughts, in a safe environment.

I got out [of hospital] just before Christmas in 98, I just crashed from a great, great height, yeah I think I was…. I was still quite high when I came out and that’s why I should have been kept in because they’d have been able to catch me because I was basically, I was going to fall from mania, I was going to crash down at some point. and I worked over Christmas, that was the Christmas when I was doing some charity work. I was working for [organisation], at a hostel over the Christmas period and it was so depressing. And then I just plummeted and I was, I was so depressed and I knew I was depressed and I was so suicidal and I had, good God, you know, I had seventeen thousand pounds worth of debt.

And I had to get back to work to pay it off and it was also clear that I couldn’t work. I wasn’t in a fit state to work, I was far too depressed and I was worthless and how did I let this happen. And of course actually that spending is all part of mania. Just as retribution is part of depression, so it was, “Mea culpa, mea culpa”, I’ve mucked it all up, you know, it’s all my fault. So in January of 99, probably about mid January, third week or so something like that, I tried to kill myself.

I got to see the occupational health officer at work pretty much straight away. He called her and said, you know, “He really needs you to see him now”. And she sat down in the office, talked about a few things, about how I was feeling. She asked me a few questions about, you know, had I been having difficulty sleeping, had I been having difficulty concentrating and things like that and she said, “It sounds like you’ve got symptoms of depression now”. So she suggested I go and see my GP that day, which I did. And the GP signed me off. I don’t remember initially how long it was for, possibly a week, two weeks, I was signed off work. And they just basically advised me just to relax, try just not to think about work, not to feel any pressure about going back to work. My GP said, “You know, you’re under no obligation to go back to work, the most important thing is your health, that you relax”. There was a lot of guilt there, there was a lot of pressure thinking no, I should be at work. You know, just because I had this bad day, I should be at work, I’m expected to be at work. You know, everyone is probably at work saying, “Why isn’t he here, he hasn’t got a broken leg, you know, ok he just had a really bad day, but you know he should be here, we all have bad days!’

And what happened was the depression gradually went. It didn’t go over night, and I – I saw the clinical psychologist again, and I remember her saying to me I think your depression has lifted, but it’s left you very unconfident and very anxious. But I could see the black moods had gone, but I had become very anxious in social situations. I managed to go back to work, again I went for half a day, then a day, then gradually built up to the three days I’m doing now, and for a little while I just shadowed other people. I could do the job, but when it came to sitting in the staff room and talking generally I wouldn’t say anything because I just felt so anxious about how people perceived me because I’d been so ill. And what were they thinking, and were they thinking if I could do the job? So I found that very difficult, and I also found it very difficult with other people in other settings.

Works had always been really important to me and I’m more like a perfectionist. So everything has to be a 100%, you know, and all that. And I got made promotion several times with my job, and then suddenly, I think like many companies, people started making people redundant, and requesting people to take on more and more and more. In the end I was doing the job 5 people used to do. I was enjoying it. I enjoyed it to the point where it was just getting, physically it was just getting an impossibility. But I’d always loved my job, but it was then becoming that I was away 5, 6 days a week, getting home and I couldn’t get away from work basically, because I would get back here and there would be faxes and messages and goodness knows what and…. A lot of my job was travelling a lot I was covering a huge area, not just the UK. And one day I just sort of came home after I had been away for a week, parked my car outside, sat on the pavement and just broke down, basically.

And one of the ladies who knows me, shes had depression before and so she knows what it’s like anyway. Excuse the way I speak but I had a fit recently at work, I had a couple of fits basically, and the one where she… the, the one that she helped me…. well she helped me on both. Basically, one, one day they put me out on this run. And when I found out the run I was doing I said, “I don’t want to do it,” I says, “its too heavy.” And they, they said, “All right, [participant’s name], well change you around and come back, come and work in the morning and well have changed you around.” And when I got to work the following day they hadn’t, and I was shaking and I said, “I can’t handle this,” I said. “I can’t do that run.” And the girl I was meant to be working with, she, she was there as well. And I was in the toilets crying and I said, “I can’t do this.” So I went, I went home sick.

In November I was very stressed at work and I was being challenged in a kind of very negative way, and there is this guy who doesn’t like me and I don’t like him. And so, I was kind of being pushed to my limits of I was challenged all the time, blah, blah, blah. So I had basically to produce I was putting a proposal for a client, a very important client to the company and I did this without any support. And the guy I was working with was saying that what I was doing wasn’t good enough, but in a very negative way. And I felt really, I’ve never felt in my life so kind of. feeling that I wasn’t capable, unable to perform. I did suspect he might have been homophobic. At the same time I think the first symptoms of depression started with me losing interest in sex, and I’m a very sexual person, so it was totally lost’ And then after Christmas I got back to work and in my first week in January this year, I learned that I had been successful in this proposal so that gave me a boost.

Well it’s like the company from hell you know. And I had the boss from hell. I mean he… he just, he seemed to really get off on power. He didn’t… if he could provoke a strong emotion in people, he didn’t mind. If it was hatred, that was fine. You know he didn’t have any need for people to like him. He didn’t make any attempt to respect people so they would respect him. You know he just ruled by fear, intimidation, bullying… and because I worked alongside of him most of the time, I used to joke that I ought to have ‘whipping boy’ on my job description. Because if he was mad at that guy I got it. You know.

Well it was the worst combination I could have had really because I would just… all the anger I felt towards him I just turned inwards because I, you know, I wasn’t confident enough to yell at him. And, in fact, the whole company… he had somehow got such an awful hold on the whole company that everyone was the same really. People just avoided him, you know, breathey’d a sigh of relief when he was out of the office for a few days on business.

And for me, the way that university used to get rid of people was they would put you in a job that you didn’t like. It wasn’t your boss that does the hiring and firing, it’s the personnel department, and shed put you in a job you didn’t like so you would go. Well I was told that you know because I wasn’t well and things I was told that I was going to be moved to another job. So when I came back from personnel he said, ‘What did they say?’, so I told him. He said not a word and walked out and he was gone for about an hour and he came back and he said [pause], ‘You will never hear from them again’ [pause]. Not a lot of people would do that [pause], not a lot of people would do that. And he wouldn’t give me a, I mean it was a heck of a busy job, I was working for the entire research team and the students and him and everything else. And he said, ‘Right that’s it, I’ll give you one job at a time, you won’t go home to feel sorry for yourself, I’ll give you one job at a time [laugh]. ‘Do that, type that and I’ll give you something else. And how many people would put up with that? You know that was tremendous. We would all have walked on hot coals for him because he just did those things for everybody, you know. You’d never get that in industry, would you?

And I really don’t remember if it was just a reaction that I had, or if I just decided. I can imagine myself doing it. Just thinking, right then, they don’t want me to say anything in class, I won’t say anything in class. But somehow it evolved so that I couldn’t, could not say anything. Like if I had to, I would just be like sweating and just hated it, I really hated it. But what upsets me about it is that it affects my life now, and it affected my life for. you know once I got to University there was no problem with me speaking up because everyone was in the same boat. No one was going to go, ‘Oh you think you’re really good’, because I was like pretty average for my University. But the fear was still there and it’s taken, even now, you know I find it hard to speak up at meetings and stuff like that, I find it really difficult.

But, moving on to University, yes I was saying that I was supposed to be quite intelligent, but I hadn’t worked out how to do stuff in a structured way, how to get myself going, how to really organise my time. I hadn’t had that much contact with kids my own age outside school before, so at university the idea of having a social life was quite new. And I think, although I had hopes when I went there, within a few months, I found it wasn’t at all enjoyable. I felt more, I didn’t seem to be able to enjoy any of the things that I tried at first, and I was just feeling very low and very lonely, needy. I was aware I needed something, I wasn’t quite sure what. And I was, I think, probably about 4 or 5 months after starting my first year, I did become very depressed, actually, and just took to moping around.

But I can’t talk to my family about it. They don’t know about the therapy. I think it’s the stigma thing. I think it’s the… I’m the youngest of a big family and I think I would be seen, my perception is that I would be seen as weak and not coping, so it’s easier for me not to admit to that weakness and just say, oh, just fudge the issue really. I could never dream of saying to my family that I was seeing a psychiatrist. I mean that would be you know, horrendous. Because they wouldn’t understand, certainly where I am now, the position I’m in now that it is actually a good thing. Whereas if I said I’m seeing a gastro-enterologist – fine, no problem, but seeing a psychiatrist that’s it, theres something deeply wrong with you. So I’ve chosen to keep that from my family, and living on my own I can do that to a certain extent.

I think that my mother had very similar experience to myself. She had, you know, I remember these highs and lows that she had. And I remember a couple of cases where she had you know a depressive, depressed period where she actually was on antidepressants. She didn’t like taking them. She was ashamed of her depression, and she stopped taking them probably far too early, but you know this was just a period where I was in my probably late teens, early twenties. But then unfortunately she died shortly after that, so it’s difficult to follow that through. And I suppose she wasn’t seeing the real me in the short periods that we had together by that stage, because I had left home and was only coming back for a few days at a time. But whether you… she didn’t see her depression as being a chronic illness. I’m not sure, I… part of me thinks that I am better at recognising it in others now. I sometimes see it in patients that are exhibiting maybe those early signs of what could be clinical depression that I might have missed before or given another reason for. But there is a familial link and I don’t know if there is, but if there is a familial link you know I would hope that I would be more aware of how they are dealing with things in general. And maybe how I could help them if indeed they became like that. I think, I have a much more open relationship I think with my children now than I ever had with my own mother.

Well, I don’t feel ashamed because I educated myself. If I stayed in the family circle and not talked to a therapist, not got help really, then perhaps I would feel ashamed. Sometimes I think it was all my fault… but on the whole I think it wasn’t my fault…. I was labelled with, like being psychotic. I was on psychotic drugs for a number of years. And the fact that I felt so ashamed was because it was written in black and white that I was psychotic. It was like saying… they may have well have said I was a mad woman. We all have different experiences and different realities at different times. Feelings are fluid. They come and go and we experience them for a reason. There is nothing ever to be ashamed about with mental health. You know, there really isn’t. I would really like to change the public’s perception of mental health problems and depression because people sometimes, you know, they would want to say well what’s the matter, what’s the matter with you? It’s like you can’t sum it up in a sentence, what’s the matter…. you know. I’ve spent a year in therapy and I still don’t know what the matter is, I haven’t got to the bottom of what’s the matter with me. It takes time, you know. It takes discovery and it takes courage and it takes persistence and energy.

“Why have you been off work?” And I went, “I’ve been in hospital.” “Oh, are you alright?” “Yeah, I’m fine thanks yes, thanks for asking.” “Um, nothing too serious I hope?” “Mmm, yeah it was, but I’m ok, I’m dealing with it, thanks for asking.” And they went, “Oh, oh wh- what was it then?” you know what people are like, they will try and get it out of you, and I think if you try to hide it gives them something to use against you. So I was just really outright, and I just said, “Ok, I was in a psychiatric hospital for a month and then outpatients for a further month and now I’m at work part-time to try and get back into the swing of things slowly.” And he just looked at me. “I’ve suffered with it most of my life, and I’m just dealing with it now.” And I… honestly he, his eyes were just, popping out of his head. His jaw hit the floor, and he just didn’t know what to say to me. So he touched my shoulder and I said, “It’s ok though,” I said, “I’m not loopy” and he just started laughing, because I’d just turned it into a joke. You know, I’d sort of was like quite light hearted about it. I said, “It’s ok, I’m not loopy, haven’t lost my marbles yet. It’ll take more than a bit of depression to get rid of me.” And you know he was just like, “Oh my God,” and I said, “Well,” I said, “you’ve probably got all sorts of questions going through your mind right now, but if you want to know a bit about it, and about what it consists of I’ll tell you.”

 think in England you still can be labelled, you know I think mental illness in England you still have the kind of stigma. But I deal with this much better I think, because in Brazilian culture it… I grew up with people seeing psychoanalysts and having nervous breakdowns you know, because one dies or whatever. But funnily enough, if you read the newspaper, you see all these artists, having breakdowns, and it’s okay and it’s almost as if they’re not humans or we are not…. God knows what, the distinction we make between them and us. But you know, I think even Beckham, the other day it was in the newspaper that he had or was about to have a nervous breakdown last year, blah, blah, blah and I said, “Oh good,” you know, I even find I think it’s really good that someone like him that is a football player blah, blah, blah goes and say, “I was about to, you know, stop playing for Manchester because of the pressure and this and that,” because it breaks this assumption that depression is an illness for women or illness for weaker people. It’s not, you know anyone can get depression.

But for me the, the fear thing is such, its about stories about black people being criminal, out of control, sexually rampant. So there are any number of settings where peoples concerns about who I am manifest as really weird and offensive behaviour towards me. And they’re so wrapped up in it I don’t think sometimes they realise how offensive they’re being, they’re just so wrapped up in their own imaginings of what could happen to them. I mean I’m you know I’m a reasonable, honest, law abiding person and I have to deal with the fact that when I am in certain confined spaces people do, do things like grabbing their bags. Or looking, or not wanting to sit next to you or, there are all sorts of things where they make it so obvious. You know I don’t think I’m particularly paranoid, you know people will have to be quite crass before I will have to start registering that something actually isn’t working…. I’ll speak personally because I mean I could pontificate how ‘the black community’ whatever that is, copes, I don’t know. How I deal with it is sometimes its difficult, most of the time its just stuff. You have to remember that I’ve been in this identity all my life, so it’s not as if I suddenly came here and had to learn to be related to differently…. As I was born here, born at a time when racism was really virulent and naked and raw and I now live with increasing layers of veneers of civilised response…. people have learnt what they should and shouldn’t say to keep their badge of being related to as a decent person.

To be honest, this is not the first time I’ve lived on my own. This is like a second spell. During 1999-2000 I actually moved out and I was living in [area name] at the time, in the [area name] for just over a year. And I felt [sigh] having my own space… I feel that has helped me now, especially when I was in [area name] because it was having that certain peace of mind where I can come and go as I please and have the space and freedom to do what I want when I want. Not that I actually was very pro-active in getting out and about and being involved in things or staying out late or whatever. But it just gave me a chance to just run my life at the pace that I felt comfortable with, without making any compromises or having to interact with people and fit in with their circumstances.

And it’s probably, I just have got a fiery temper. I’ll take everything and it will be fine, and then all of a sudden, bang. But… but because I’m an extrovert person in that respect, I’ll either scream and shout, or I’ll just smash stuff up and I have to be on my own, I can’t do it when theres people around [laughing]. So, the other day I just took to throwing some of my china mugs around and which… I didn’t really want to do but I just had to do it, you know it just had to happen… because I didn’t know where else to put this anger. So if you can control the anger it can propel you, it can make you do things positive, but you have to sit and think about it because if you let go of it, it can be quite nasty. And it frightens me, it used to frighten me at some, at one stage I remember saying that one day this, these bloody kids up the end of the road a while ago were, I don’t know, there was a dog and it was chasing a cat and this cat was deaf. I knew the neighbour’s cat, it was deaf and I thought, the anger was just so acute.

I ah… I think, being intelligent when you’re depressed is not a great thing, because I think what you try to do is you try to, I think I said it before, you try to intellectualise everything, you try to make, understand it, why these things are happening to you, without necessarily confronting the emotional issues. I think also that it, ultimately it gives you an insight, which sometimes makes it more difficult, you know you sort of understand too well about what can happen or what can’t happen, but I think the big thing is that it doesn’t matter how smart you are, you’ve gotta deal with the emotion. And I think sometimes intelligent people run away from the emotion by, literally, burying their head in a book, or, trying to find some sort of solution or biochemical explanation why they’re sick.

I don’t know why, but I’ve been the victim of gay-related violence over the last fifteen, twenty years on very odd occasions. It’s not just a physical violence. I think it’s the other violence that gay men and women like, just like black people and other minority groups experience. The prejudice is a form of violence and I do feel that strongly about it. Peoples antagonism, their ill feelings, the snide remarks in the workplace they cause pain in the same way a smack in the jaw causes pain. It’s not the same pain but it is still pain. And it’s… of course it’s still unacceptable and I think once you realise and tell yourself, and tell other people that this is unacceptable, that’s a good step towards being able to handle it. But as well as the shitty and unpleasant conditions in the workplace that I’ve suffered then clearly very much the gay bashings and the aftermath of that have contributed to my depression. Looking back I think they have prolonged it. Not [pause] not made it worse, I can’t see how you can quantify that, but they have certainly extended and protracted the bad days and they’ve also realised that I am also suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder. And that has been diagnosed by the GP. And again, just to see that in black and white on the medical certificate is somehow strengthening.

Because, very often with depression you think, oh it’s my fault, I’m inadequate, I can’t get, I can’t do this. It’s not that, you’re suffering, one is suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder because some other twat out there has thumped you.

It sounds odd but it’s had a very positive effect. It really has. I mean I hope that I understand other people. I mean, yes, you do still write off people don’t you as, “Hes a miserable so and so”. Then you start thinking about it and talking about it to somebody and you think, somebody might else jog your memory that there are other sides to people. And it has had that….. And I, I really feel, well sort of complimented really, that there are people who think, “Thank goodness I can talk to you, cause you understand”. It’s not a lot to give to people but I’m really complimented that they feel that, they feel that. And that really makes me feel good about myself, not in any, or have I got any sort of….., But just, it makes you feel good inside that perhaps you have helped somebody. And I think it has had that effect and that also on my son. It’s [pause] I think, he probably feels something more for me, perhaps if hed lived, been brought up in an ordinary, you know 2 parent family. I mean I feel that we have a great closeness, I mean he does too, you know it’s not something you talk about really. But, I always feel wherever he goes in the world he, it’s the only relationship in my life that I’ve felt confident about, it doesn’t matter if he goes to America or somewhere, he would feel the same way about me. And the fact that hes got a girlfriend, hes you know, so keen to you know [pause] want to be with, and that’s not changed him towards me at all. In fact, its sort of, its made him grow up at lot actually, yes. And that’s a good thing.

Just going back into my normal life where, you know, I see my friends, I, you know, I’m happy with my children, I just, you know, I take up all my interests again. I’ve got a lot of interests, I just start living life again properly. And this last time I’ve… I’ve changed a lot because I’ve left tea-, I left teaching about, it’s a year and… a year and a half ago, in the summer of 2002. And then, and then for the next year, and then, then I was depressed up to Christmas and then… no, it must have been, [pause] and then I was working on, when I was well again I was working on a very interesting project which I’d become involved in, an equestrian musical which was based in Switzerland, which we were hoping to bring to England. And it’s, it’s a beautiful production with, a musical with fifteen horses in it and I’d, I’d got involved in it and gone along to write… I do a bit of journalistic writing and we, we did, we weren’t able to do it, you know, because it was too difficult, but we tried, we tried for the finance…

I feel as if I have been in actually…. in recovery for a few months now, or perhaps longer since May, June time. June time say, but I hadn’t actually realised I’d been in recovery. I had to go to a recovery conference to kind of realise I was in recovery [laugh]. It means that life is changing. It is not changed. It’s a constant thing, its always changing. It changes every day and I notice things that I didn’t, that I haven’t noticed for years. I can listen to music and appreciate it in a different way…. it can move me now. Something on the TV can move me now, and I have, I feel things and things affect me. I was so cut off. I’d put up, you know, sorry to use the really bland expression of putting up a brick wall, a very good brick wall, but I really had built up a very good high brick wall and nothing came in or out. And I didn’t feel much at all about anything. I just functioned for a long time.

I mean I don’t know if this would be helpful for people who access the web-site and are having their first depression or people like me who have been depressed, because also in a situation like me, this I think is important to say and I forgot….when you come out of a depression is the fear of having another one. You know, because again, I keep asking myself whether this is a cycle thing, you know like there is a time of cycle that you are getting again and again and another one. And when you come out of one, you just despise, you know you’re terrified of getting another one, and when you have another one, having had one before, the only consolation is that you know you’re going to come out. But this doesn’t make the pain any easier, you know it’s still very painful… It doesn’t make it any easier having had previous experiences, it’s always horrible…. But the fear of having one again, it must be almost like people who have cancer, and then they have this remission periods you know, that, yeah it’s a remission thing that scares you the most, so sometimes, even when I feel a bit down, not necessarily [laughing] is going to develop into depression, I worry about you know, and I say, “Oh my gosh you know”, and I want to feel happy again as soon as I can. So I’m sure it’s not going to develop in to the more serious long term depression.

Well as the time between the depression now grows, in does get easier. I… I still think about depression most days, it’s still there in my thoughts, but I – I’m more able now to – to see that I do have moods, perhaps slightly more than other people, but because theres a dip, that doesn’t mean the depression is going to come back. And I’m able just to go, go with it, and through experience I know that I do come out the other side, but it has been tough lesson and I suppose it had left me quite hyper-vigilant in terms of my thoughts and feelings.

But my mood, started lifting. I did start feeling better, more energetic, less tired, more able to concentrate and more able to function. One of the, one of the most striking things that struck me the first time I took antidepressants and the second time is all of a sudden you realise how much colour is, there is in the world. But I think when I was depressed my, my perception of colour had really diminished. In fact I was sort of progressively seeing, you know, everything in a monochrome world and all of a sudden you know, you take antidepressants and you think, “Wow, aren’t trees green”, you know. Or, “Wow, apples they are red and they are sort of yellowie.” And you sort of start noticing colours and things like that, which was great. But the pills weren’t strong enough and although I felt much better, I didn’t, I didn’t stop feeling depressed and that was shortly before, before Christmas….

I mean, as I say I find living at the moment, what I would call living of course… Quite tricky at the moment, really as I’ve already, you know, I said now before because [clears throat]. I mean, I have to take it, as I say, day to day really now. Day and night time too of course, but mostly in the daytime because of how I’m feeling or… Or not knowing how I’m going to feel, that’s the trouble. You know I often think, oh, what am I doing, and although it sounds rather dark, sort of wh- what am I doing in the world? You know and what is the purpose, what is the point of, say this, what is exactly going on, but you know, in some ways we all have to know that. What are we here for? And what are we doing? And what are we getting out of it? And so on, but th- you know then in living like what are we getting out of… like from it? But, [sighs] I feel that you know as I’ve already said that, you know, with my depression and anxiety and the ME as well, or possible ME until I’ve seen, hopefully, a specialist or some… which as I say I’m waiting for. I think. It’s sort of knowing what to do about it really because, it certainly doesn’t make living easy with all these symptoms and feeling sort of off as I sort of call it you see. And sort of, knowing how to sort of go on you know every day can seem rather samey as I’ve already said, you know, it’s another day and then, sort of a night, and so on.

And I think also, this was discussed in the Depression Group which I found very interesting, I think having depression and living with someone who is not depressed at the time you are, or someone who has never had depression, I think we feel very, I mean we put on ourselves this pressure of getting better, because it must be a burden on the other person…. and a burden to friends. Actually, my partner has played a key role in my recovery – he was very supportive during my depression periods – I do not know how I would have coped without him. It must be very hard dealing on a daily basis with someone you love with depression! Many times he has forced me to do things and helped me out of the house in times when I did not feel like doing anything. I believe having a loving and caring partner has helped me get over the most horrible periods of my depression. However, having said all that – not even your partner can rescue you from your own depression! It must be very frustrating for them. I really do not know which is the hardest position to be in – the person suffering with depression, or being with someone suffering from depression.

But I’ve never, never been ashamed of myself. As a wee girl as I said I have realised and I just thought I was weak because I was always told I was stupid, an idiot. Shes an idiot, she can’t do anything, shes stupid, shes this and shes that. And that is the change in my life. I thought my life was completely finished. I’ve missed out. But now I feel as if I’ve got something to offer and meet all sorts on a night out. My pal phoned last night and she said to me, “Would you like to go away for a wee weekend”, and I went, “Oh I don’t know about that”. I said, “Oh I don’t know” she said, “Well”, no nay think about it, she says alright, “No, wait a couple of months down the line”. So now when I come off the phone I went, this was me worrying again, about what she would think about me if I was away with her like….. so I don’t know. Maybe I will give it a I try.

The most important thing in my mind at the moment is how much better I am than I’ve been in my whole life. It seems amazing at the age of sixty nine that I should be… feel as if I’m more healthy than I’ve been in the whole of the rest of my life. But I can remember back to when I was about four years old, and even then I was supposed to be a weak little boy, at least in the eyes of my mother. And from then onwards I was ill, I’d look after myself, life seemed to be kind of grey a lot of the time and I felt cold and I felt lonely a lot. When I was in secondary school I got, I was playing football and I got pneumonia, and as a result of that I got tuberculosis. And at that time you couldn’t cure that easily, there weren’t any drugs for it, so I had to stay in bed for about six months and I was a very active child. So I took that very badly, but as a result of the illness I became very interested in ways that I could get more healthy. Then when I got back to school after the illness I wasn’t allowed to play games for some years actually, and that made me even keener to find other ways of getting stronger. Then I got very interested in organic food and whole foods, I used to bake my own bread… when I was about thirteen years old and this kind of thing. But it didn’t seem to have a very obvious effect on my health.

I’ve recently met somebody through work, who has suffered from depression in her life, and is further along the road to recovery than I am, and that has been quite inspirational, because I can see that you can come… you can come out of it okay. She was in hospital, shes been through an awful lot, she didn’t have the benefit of therapy like I’d had, but shes, shes not just surviving, she is enjoying her life. And I think that’s been really helpful for me to meet somebody who – I’m at a point now where I can talk openly about it. If I’d have met her two years ago theres no way I would have said, “Yeah, I also have depression”, and I think it’s helped her and it’s helped me.

I think the difference now is that now I understand why I’m unhappy. I wouldn’t say I’m blissfully happy up against that, but I think I know what I do that makes me unhappy. I haven’t got to the point of being able to turn it around yet, fully, but I do know that there are certain things ingrained, about how I live, about how I conduct myself, that are very detrimental to me being a happy person. And there are things that keep me in a place of being depressed, and that’s what the therapy really helps with it… in helping me understand how I perpetuate the depression…. I think for me it’s about blaming myself for most things, thinking that I’m a bad person, and I can expend huge amounts of energy on the mental processes that go into making me responsible for everything that goes wrong in the world. And that’s really very tiring, but I’m really very good at it.

But I think therapy gave me permission to say yeah I was right, rather than just somehow still thinking as a child I was failing because I felt very stressed with my parents. And I… because I think when you are a child anyway, you tend to think your parents have, or are this fount of wisdom, and they are right and you are wrong. And, you know… to sort of to think yeah I was right when I thought Mum shouldn’t have said that, or done that, or that wasn’t very wise or whatever. Because I was brought… I was ruled entirely by manipulation. That I guess again is just a different generation I guess. I can be quite magnanimous about it now. I could have killed at the time, but I was ruled entirely by manipulation and controlled that way. Very down trodden kid, only child of parents who were in their late thirties when they had me, which was very old for then. I know it is more of a norm now but very old-fashioned parents. I was an only child so I’d not got any moral support from siblings.

I mean getting over depression is about discovering that, I mean discovering I could have decent relationships was the same kind of… Again it’s about that thing of joining the rest of the human race, thinking actually I’m not different. That’s, I know that makes me sound like a natural conformist, I don’t think I am, that’s not what I mean. It’s just like yeah, you can also have access to the same bank or pool or account of experience that everyone else can draw on, and that’s… as I’ve grown up. I’ve discovered that I’m not that weird, not that different and things that I thought were denied to me, you know if you’d said to me in my mid twenties, even in my happiest time I would’ve said to you, “Yeah, I’m a happy guy, I’ll probably never manage a relationship, a long term relationship or get married to anyone but that’s absolutely fine.” About two weeks before I met my wife I remember going to a wedding and looking at these people and thinking, “How does anyone do that, how does anyone think they’re that secure with anyone?” And just thinking, “Well, that’s denied to me, and that’s okay. That’s fine, I can live with that. You know some people never, I don’t know visit you know visit Africa or something, I just won’t be doing that.” And then sure enough, I discovered that I could do it, and it worked, and it was a shock to me and a wonderful surprise.

What have I learned? I’ve learned that the only thing that matters in life is love and peace. That, sort of, strict discipline is not important. It’s balance that really matters. I’ve learnt that a breakdown can also be a breakthrough. I’m one of these people that’s obviously had to be broken down in order to grow enough. I’m not saying that everybody needs to do that, they don’t, in the severe way I have, but…

The rigidity had to be broken down. I mean, after the first depression, my the religious binding, as it were, and I think religious, religion means that which is bound, but that had to be completely…. that was completely knocked out of me. Whether I liked it or not, and of course I felt, that, during that first depression, I was going about saying, “But what happens if theres no life after death?” All the doubts that I’d squashed in my teens were of course coming out now and I had to deal with them. They just hit me in the face. And I thought the end of the world had come. If this wasn’t true, supposing it weren’t true, life after death, you know.

You know, I can actually see that there might be a third way, of me moving forward in life, but it’s been a very long process. I didn’t imagine that two and a half years later I would still be having weekly therapy, to get better. It is, but it’s scary, if you’re used to living in a very constrained band in your life, then the actual idea that you can take charge of your life… The bigger world is very scary. I think it’s something to do with when you live with depression the way that I have, you are limiting your life. You don’t necessarily know why you are limiting your life, but through your thought processes and the way you are as a person, you concentrate on surviving life. You know, you’re getting through life but you don’t necessarily get any pleasure from it. There may be the odd day here and there that are great, but you’re surviving, and you don’t really have any sense of why you are doing that. But if I choose to live differently, if I choose to, and can, set aside the depression, and think, right, I’m going to live life as other people seem to live it, that’s really scary because that’s been so much part of my life. And to actually live life without worrying every minute about what’s going to happen next, about what people think of me, about what, am I doing a good enough job, you know to actually take life as it is, and to take knocks on the chin, and you know, dust myself off, and not worry about it, it’s just a completely different way of living. And it’s scary because I’ve never done that before, and I clearly need a lot of help to get to that point. But I do know that I want to live life and be more happy, and be more settled, and have a point to my life, you know, have a purpose, other than just getting through it.

Now the early part of medication you feel you’re getting nowhere. And then after a while you do sort of… be able to cope in a fashion, but that’s because you’re totally dependent on the, on the medication. And the medication keeps you stable, keeps… you’re able to go to work, you’re able to do your job, able to enjoy quite a few things. But it doesn’t get rid of the fears and whatnot because that’s a sort of a different, different area, your thinking processes… They’re yours and that’s where it’s got to come from you, you’ve got to get there yourself, I don’t think theres a miracle cure. They’ll give you the tools for you to do it, but you end up, you’ve got to do it, theres a… I’m convinced of that. No one is actually going to make you better but they’re going to help you get better.

[Sigh] I would just like to say there is light at the end of the tunnel and I just know that people watching this who are really ill will just be thinking, “Oh yeah bog off you stupid old woman”. But I felt like they may be feeling now, and I would never, ever have believed I could be this well. I am more well now that I have ever been in my life. My quality of life is better in terms of… I’ve got a bounce in my step. I have fun. I don’t kind of live for weekends or live for holidays, I enjoy every day. And I guess theres stuff that sounds patronising like just take the best out of every day, but we only have one shot at life don’t we? This isn’t the dress rehearsal. This is it. You know, I have got well and I’m taking my tablets and I’m happily going to take them for the rest of my life. I’m not going to muck about with them.

Right well, I suppose the thing I would like to say is hang on in there, hang on in there. Most people, and I stress most people, do recover from depression. Of itself, it doesn’t appear to be life threatening. But of course it can lead you to you know self harm if you so get that far along the line. But if you cling on to the thought that most people recover, and that you will get better. But it may take time, and I think I would just stress that you need hope, you need hope that it’s not the end of the line for you. You very likely will get better but you need time. And you needn’t be too hard on yourself and think that you’re a failure and you’ve got it all wrong… you cannot see the end because your circumstances are such that you’re locked into this cycle of hopelessness, you can’t function, your brain doesn’t function, and you can’t believe then that you’re going to be okay as a human being, in which case you’ve just got to hang on. It’s lovely if you’ve got the support and encouragement of those around you, but you’re not necessarily going to get that, and we needn’t pretend that you will. But as I say most people do get better with depression.

I would strongly urge and recommend that they seek help. Don’t suffer in silence. I mean for a long time I kept quiet about it, I did nothing about the depression and, believe me, it festers, it gets worse, it doesn’t get any better. My advice to them is to, [pause] talk to somebody that you feel close to, somebody who you can confide in, a family member, a relative, a close friend and also to your GP. And get help, get counselling and try and get as much help and support as you can because there is no stigma to depression anymore, whereas for a long time in the past it was all covered up. It is recognised as a major illness now; it affects so many thousands of people. The only way that one can ever combat it and deal with it effectively is to actually get the help that they need and to be open about it. To be open about your feelings, and to be open about the symptoms, and to seek help in doing something about it.

You are stuck. They are stuck with the professionals. That… that does not sound very complimentary to the professionals, but initially, they [sufferers] need to get help from wherever it comes. I would like to think that today, people are more compassionate than maybe they were when I was depressed. Perhaps they are I would think there were more skilled people about. And you need to take help from wherever you can get it, but equally it’s [pause] Really, the bottom line is the person who’s got it is the best person to overcome it. The only person to overcome it.

It’s like a hole, it’s sort of like slipping into a muddy hole and you’re trying not to slide… trying to get up the sides and you keep sliding down again and you need help. I think that’s what I would say. The periods of counselling I’ve had, self-help psychology, rebirthing. Things I’ve done have all helped, even going for physical therapies, like acupuncture, shiatsu, have helped, because you can talk to somebody sensible and they do give your physical system a boost, you know. I mean depression makes you feel different physically. It upsets your physiology in some way and doing those sort of things, going to the gym, doing exercise and things, getting out, doing something can help reverse that, and doing nothing never helps I’ve found. I mean I’ve tried just sort of giving in to it, just laying about and, “Oh, OK, eventually it will go”, but you don’t get anywhere with it.

I was thinking that before you came, you know, but I have been a positive person. I haven’t just sat back and I haven’t accepted drug treatment because I don’t think they solve the problem. It may be that some people have chemical imbalance or something like that and that’s a different matter. If the cause is physiological then maybe you need some drugs. But if the cause is psychological then you need to do something in order to think in a different way.

You go and see the doc, you’ve got to go straight away… you won’t do it without some help, it’s as simple as that… you feel really alone, you feel weedy, you feel cack, you just think that you’re no good. I would say that you’re wrong [laughs]. Point one. And just accept you’re wrong, say no that’s wrong I’m probably… also accept you’re not well, and therefore you not thinking right, so anything you think now is probably not right. That’s hard to do because we tend to trust what we think, especially if we think it is as powerfully as we do. But if you can just say, “No, actually at the moment, I’m ill and what I think is probably wrong,” that’s good… the voice that says to you bad things seems incredibly undeniable and it’s not. And if you could just try and say, try to act as if it’s not, then that’s really good. And again you will not believe it, but you get better and not very, not very far away from now, you will feel better.

It isn’t a one size fits all is it? You know, I think I would say to folk if you feel like you’re not getting any better, and it’s not a quick journey to get well anyway, but if you really feel after say three or four months on the particular medication that you are just not getting any better, go back to your doctor and ask your doctor to change, to consider changing your medication. Ask your doctor to refer you to a psychiatrist if you are not under a psychiatrist. And my personal experience is… is go for a younger doctor who has had more recent training in the more modern anti-depressants. And particularly, I know, you read stuff about people saying Prozac has done this, done that, you know, but any drug, you know has some side effects you know, and don’t let that put you off because living with depression is far worse than any side effects. And I… I don’t have side effects I don’t think. Perhaps I would say I’m not quite as sharp in my mind as I used to be, but maybe that’s just because I’m getting older [laugh]. But I am certainly smart enough to be able to function extremely well and do a challenging job that demands my brain to work.

There are so many people out there that I know that are in distress right now because they say that one in four people suffer from depression, so how many millions of people is that? There are more people who die through suicide than die in road traffic accidents and I don’t hear much about suicide in the media. So what I would say to anybody who is reading this, and that is in distress, is that you’re going through a process for a reason. And that may be difficult to read. You’re having feelings, maybe thoughts and feelings that you think are unusual or that are distressing you, but help is out there. In lots of different ways, and lots of areas. I know in my local area there is a 24-hour mental health line now, and there is The Samaritans, there is Depression Alliance. There are people out there who are the same. Although you may not think it, your friends and family would want to know that you are in this distress and would want to help. You may think…. It may be difficult for you to reach out, and I understand that because I didn’t for a long time. But I would really urge you to reach out if you can muster anything, reach out because there is help out there.

I think realistically in the stage that I was, I was not capable of doing anything. It needed somebody around me to do the initiating… Say look, here is somebody who needs help. If someone could actually come and said you know, “Are you depressed?” “Yes.” “Are you feeling suicidal?” “Yes.” “Do you feel capable of initiating contact with anyone and asking help?” “No.” That would have been the total of what I was capable of doing at the time. It really needed somebody else to make that contact for me and ultimately yeah, it was my wife saying, “You must go to the doctor, I will make the, the appointment. I will drive you there. I will take you there. I will sit in the, in the waiting room with you”, but, “you need the help”. It really had to come from somebody around me because I was incapable of doing it myself. And I wanted to finish by saying that the worst thing you can say to a depressed person is, “What have you got to be depressed about?” It is really as useful as saying to someone with hayfever, “What’s the point of sneezing at flowers?” Depression is an illness over which a person suffering has no control. Instead of searching for a possibly non-existent reason for a person being depressed, if you know someone who is having problems, offer them positive help. Offer to help them open their mail, offer to help them with their daily correspondence, check that they are able to get up in the morning. When I was depressed I was unable to cope with many daily tasks, it was only with the help and support of those around me that I was able to function at all.

Have belief in yourself that you will get out of this. And what I often say to people constantly on the telephone when they say, people say, “They won’t do this” and, “they won’t do that.” I say, “Well that’s right, no-one else can do it for you. The only person that can actually bring you out of this is yourself”. That was a very difficult concept for me to grasp… but I now know it, it’s true. And so if I am the only one who can get me out of this pit of depression, then it is up to me to get on with it. It is a case of not allowing yourself to forget that you can do something for yourself. You can get yourself out of it. In fact, the only person who can get yourself out of it is yourself, and no one else. It doesn’t mean to say other people can’t help you, therapists, medication, whatever, going to classes, there are other people who can help you. But you have actually got to do an incredible amount of work yourself. Developing that self-belief “I deserve the best”.

Because I think that if I set goals for myself that are, unattainable, because I feel different on a daily basis, then I’ll just set goals for myself to be disappointed. And therefore result in me feeling bad, which won’t help. So, I set mini goals. I need to get to lunchtime. I need to get to home time. I need to get to here. I need to get to there. And then I come home and I just maybe… sort of think about all the good things I’ve had, try my best not to dwell on the bad things, try and still argue my chatterbox, still sort of trying to make head or tail of the situation. Still accepting that I might still need help, keeping up to date with my GP. Speaking to my counsellor whenever I need her across the phone.

I’ve also, because I’ve got to that low point I think, one thing I sometimes mention to people is that I kind of reconciled myself with the possibility that my life might be absolutely dreadful. I might have a really horrible life, and die having fulfilled none of my ambitions. And you know, you might think that might be gloomy but I think somehow being able to accept that, it was good because then anything positive is a bonus. So anyway, I’ve gone through that period of, that’s probably it.

I think it’s (depression) definitely made me stronger, definitely, definitely. Because I have been a bit perfectionist in the past but I’m, also I’m very honest, I can’t kind of, I can’t handle false, so I feel like I’ve been honest in that I’ve kind of gone with the flow and tried to… tried to deal with it, you know. I’m not… I definitely learned a lot from it. I think, I think it was almost like, what’s, what’s the thing when you know, like a fuse going, like a fuse going when, when theres overload or whatever. It’s like a fuse going, it’s for a reason, it’s like you’re body is telling you, stop, hang on, maybe you need to go, turn around, go in another direction. So, I think I’ve learned a lot and it’s, it’s been very useful, yeah.

It may be the lesser of the two evils. It may have a protective… Also if somebody is traumatised, I’m thinking of people who in the Second World War for example, who were in prisoner of war camps, they’re traumatised, they keep having flashbacks. Maybe a period of depression protects them against unbearable pain. Although the depression itself feels unbearable at times, it may be protecting them from something even worse. That would do more damage. So…

As part of the whole story. No, not the enemy, not the enemy. It’s not helpful to think of it as an enemy. And it’s not helpful for me to think badly of myself because I’m depressed. It seems to me it’s ok, in the sense, I am ok, not the whole of me is depressed, a part of me. This depression is a manifestation of a malaise, of a need to become more whole. That’s how I look at it. If I am depressed, then I have the opportunity to change. I get to a point, when the depression is not so severe, I get to a point, and only I know when that is, and I know in my bones, when I can choose either to change certain ways I live, attitudes I have, or to go back to the old ways which will probably result in another depression. It’s rather like having a dream, which is telling me something. I take no notice so it recurs and recurs until I do.

In 2004, I was diagnosed with Bipolar 1. The diagnosis was long overdue. Years of struggling with crippling depression and anxiety had taken their toll. Afterwards, I sought to improve my sense of self-worth by becoming an advocate for others who struggle with a mental health disorder. This past year, the changing nature of my condition forced me to face my long-held sense of shame and self-contempt and find a new path forward. The diagnosis of bipolar came following my admission to a local hospital while I was suffering from a psychotic episode. I do not recall throwing a trash can at police, nurses restraining me to my bed, or screaming obscenities in A&E. My recollections are hazy and based in delusion not reality.

For instance, my brain recalls a moment when I had a perfectly pleasant chat with the famous reformer Martin Luther, a man who was actually the hospital chaplain. This incident in A&E and my subsequent two-week hospital stay was an all-time low point. Already struggling with a poor self-concept, this event only served to convince me how truly pathetic I was. After my diagnosis, many aspects of life did improve. Medication assisted me in finding my centre and ceasing to swing quite as extravagantly. I began to meet with a therapist weekly to explore healthy ways of coping with my condition. Unfortunately, self-loathing reached an all-time low. I felt that my condition was a weakness of character. Why could I not control my own mind? The stigma surrounding mental health in the population at large was also a difficult burden to bear. A diagnosis of bipolar felt like the branding of a scarlet letter.

Three years after my diagnosis, I attempted to play an active role in breaking the stigma by creating a website, poolsofblessing.com. Where I began to share personal stories about what it was like to live with a mental health disorder. Though my intent was to shine a light on why mental health is health, this mission became a trap in and of itself. It felt that this was my way of apologising to the world at large for my diagnosis. If I made myself useful, it would make up for my shortcomings and failures. What I didn’t realise back then is that I had nothing to apologise or make up for. Recently, the symptoms of my condition changed. I was no longer struggling with deep depression. It was agreed that this might mean I was ready to reduce certain medication dosages. Unfortunately, I was gliding into mania more consistently and unable to recognise it since it had not been the predominant aspect of my moods. With support from my spouse as well as my own self-awareness, I eventually recognised what was happening and with professional support found the right dosage of the right medication to bring me back to centre.

The uncertainty of this episode brought on more feelings of self-hatred at first. Shortly after coming back to centre, emotionally, I sat on my back porch watching the sunset. Wallowing in angst over all that had transpired over the past six months, I witnessed the moment when light and darkness merged. In that instant, a revelation struck. The world is full of opposites. Night and Day, Cold and Heat, Up and Down, Left and Right, Top and Bottom – the list goes on and on. As a teacher, I loved teaching opposites to my younger students. As a mom, I played opposites matching games when my kids were preschoolers. In many ways, opposites make the world go round. In that twilight moment, it also occurred to me that despite my bipolar diagnosis, I have continually sought to find balance between light and dark. For instance, I try to find medication that prevents me from perpetually swinging. I also utilise tools like faith, mindfulness, purposeful breathing, and therapy to find my balance point.

I am proud to say that I am no longer ashamed of my diagnosis or the fact that I struggle to find my balance point. I choose to view myself as a warrior rather than a wounded victim. If you have a diagnosis of bipolar or any other mental health problem, it may help to choose to see yourself for the fighter you are. Try not to get stuck in a state of self-loathing. Embrace the reality that opposites can be beautiful, especially for those of us who seek to find balance and move towards health and stability.

I asked for help from teachers and doctors etc but was told, you’re a teenager, you’re growing up, your parents are going through a divorce, it will all be fine. At university I managed to fail my first year three times. Again I asked for help and again I was told I was going through a difficult period, away from home for the first time, it will all be fine. My behaviour became more erratic with wild mood swings. I spent an entire student loan in 3 hours, which was impressive seeing I’d only been to HMV and Burton menswear. In 1993 I spent £60 in a few hours at a 50p a pint night. I was displaying classic symptoms of bipolar disorder, but I didn’t know it. To me and to the outside world it just looked like totally irresponsible behavior. I begun to hate myself and started to self-harm. This went on through my twenties.

Eventually I was signposted to Mind and through them I got back into the medical system and finally got the diagnosis of bipolar type 1. I jumped for joy even in being diagnosed with such a serious illness. I couldn’t deal with looking in the mirror and seeing someone I hated, but I could live with and overcome being ill. I also discovered that I’d been given the wrong medication on many occasions with antidepressants elevating my mood when it was already dangerously high.

There seemed to be no knowledge of mental health and wellbeing during my most difficult moments. It should have been obvious to anyone with a modicum of knowledge that what I was going through was not some stage of erratic behaviour but clearly a mental illness. The fact that it took 3 suicide attempts and 16 years to diagnose that demonstrates it. Unless you were seen to be in extreme danger you weren’t going to get any support. I loved the idea of hearing my story in another person’s voice. As a keynote speaker, I tell my story regularly and the impact of hearing it so often in my own voice has almost numbed me to it. Thanks to the likes of Jords, the spoken-word genre will help us speak to communities that we have found it so hard to reach. As a West Indian man, and knowing the challenges that black men face in getting support and breaking down the stigma within their communities about mental health, this is a hugely exciting proposition for me. Jords was really engaging. He wanted to do something special and he wasn’t paying lip service to it. Because he was from a similar kind of ethnic and cultural background he understood what young Black guys have gone through in terms of wellbeing and mental health. The trust and empathy hopefully helped us in driving the a truly impactful finished product. When I first heard the poem, I was in shock. I couldn’t believe that what normally takes me 45 minutes to narrate had taken him about 35 seconds. I was like, “how has someone taken such detail and condensed it into something so impactful in such a short period of time?” I tend not to jump in with my opinion straightaway, but anyone who’d seen the grin on my face would have known straight off how much I like it. It’s a really impressive piece of work by a hugely talented artist. I think the poem and the project have the potential to achieve so many different things. I want people to understand that mental ill health impacts all types of communities. But I also want people to take a positive message from it. There is always hope. There is help. There are resources out there. There is the opportunity to thrive and come through the toughest challenges. Mental ill health has taught me compassion and patience, and allowed me to understand what others are going through in their lives. All the stuff you can’t see. I’m a better and more successful person because of my mental illness, not despite it.

I was sitting my A-Levels when two of my friends suddenly passed away. Soon after, my world went numb. Everything seemed so bleak. These feelings continued for four months and led to me failing to get the grades for my top university choice. I decided to re-sit the year – I was not ready for uni and my mind was still reeling from the events of the year before. The same period of numbness happened in the resit year, but I managed to secure the grades I needed to study Aeronautical Engineering at Imperial College London. I arrived at uni feeling optimistic that it was a fresh start and I was excited to be living in such an amazing place.

Towards Christmas my mood dropped again and this lasted until April. I didn’t sit all of my exams and failed the ones I did sit. Instead of feeling low, my mood suddenly spiked and I booked to go to Singapore last minute and stay at the famous Marine Bay Sands hotel despite having no money. When I returned I was notified I had to repeat the year of uni. The exact same thing happened again. My mood dropped for months, then I experienced a period of extreme energy and irritability. Once again this derailed my studies and I got the inevitable email in July that I had failed my first year again. I was broke. I realised at this point that something might be wrong with me but coming from a family that failed to recognise mental health problems I kept my concerns quiet.

I almost left uni at this point. I felt useless and defeated. Somehow I managed to land a job related to my degree and honestly, it saved my life at the time. I had boundless energy at this point. To put it in perspective, my schedule was: Wake at 4:40AM; Arrive at work by 8AM; Home for 8PM; Watch uni lectures from that day; Bed at 2AM. I did this for four months without feeling tired. I performed well at work, got nominated for an award and was involved in as much as I could be. I was also exercising three times a day at weekends to burn energy. Then I crashed. One night I stood up and collapsed. I was taken to hospital and was told I had overrun my body and damaged the muscles in my chest. A period of depression followed and once again I struggled to function. I went to a GP and was put on the waiting list for cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT). CBT did help, but it didn’t stop these extreme moods. I didn’t fully tell the therapist how much the past few years were impacted by these episodes as I still felt mental health carried stigma. Eventually I was referred to the Community Mental Health Team (CMHT) who suggested I had bipolar disorder but said they would just monitor me for the next few months. I knew this wasn’t going to be enough. I did pass my uni exams finally (third time lucky) and so I was heading back to study. I broke down to my department just before uni started and told them about the events of the past few years. I felt so vulnerable, unsure what they would make of it. However they stepped up and transformed my university experience. I was given a place in a student hall close to campus and a whole range of support within uni. Under a new CMHT I now had a diagnosis of bipolar and started on medication. But this didn’t stop the episodes. The medication made me vomit each night for a month and affected my ability to play hockey which I had previously loved. I would miss doses, bin my meds, pretty much do everything except consistently take them. This obviously affected how successful my treatment was but I didn’t see that at the time. Unable to keep myself safe I found myself in and out of psychiatric units each year of my degree. Thanks to the support I got from uni I finished the rest of my degree with much less disruption – I still failed exams and submitted work late sometimes, but I was supported though this. In my third year, when Covid hit, things went academically well. I won a prize for coming top of the year in a project and was named as one of the top 10 female undergraduates of the year in the UK. My fourth year also went more smoothly and, despite getting admitted to another psychiatric unit, I finished my degree and got the grade I wanted.

So, to now. Are things perfect? No. I found myself in another unit this year shortly after starting my new job. But things changed when I got out. I have previously struggled to accept my condition, and when I came out of hospital I realised that I have the most important role to play in managing it. I started educating myself about bipolar disorder. I read blogs, books and watched documentaries. It stressed the importance of having a schedule and being consistent with your meds. All of these things seem so obvious, but I find that when I am most unwell these things go out of the window. I am back at work, playing hockey and generally enjoying this new stability that I sought for so long. I have also taken part in Mind events and had a great time raising money for the 27 27 challenge in solidarity with the 27% of students who report a mental health problem whilst at uni. This doesn’t mean I won’t experience episodes and challenges, but it does mean I am as armed and prepared to fight back as I have ever been. And for that I am grateful to everyone who has supported me through these years and thankful that I have taken control and changed the direction of my life.

Before I was formally assessed for bipolar, for years I'd been dealing with what I thought was ‘just me.’ But it wasn’t ‘just me’, there was something else going on beneath the surface. To other people I appeared ‘stupid’ or reckless. Back then, I was constantly playing games with myself. I’d cross the road with my eyes closed - walking a thin line between life and death. When I look back on my behaviour I think, ‘idiot.’ Why would I do that? But at the same time, I can't explain why either. I just felt inclined to play with my own life every now and then.

I was homeless when I had a psychiatric assessment and was diagnosed with type 1 bipolar disorder. Over a period of seven years, I went through five different hostels in Cardiff, and even did two periods of living on the streets. My life was very, very chaotic. I was at a point where I didn't want to live anymore. I had nothing to look forward to. I didn't own anything. I had no prospects. I had no aspirations. I had nothing, really. I was just living day to day. Living on the streets made my condition even harder to deal with, and my condition made living on the streets harder, too. Support services for the homeless were mainly focused on drug rehabilitation, and I didn’t do drugs. I refused to become a product of my environment. I’d seen too many family members fall victim to drugs. Having no money meant I couldn’t do the little things that might make me feel better. Even those very simple things – I couldn’t go to the shop and buy a bottle of coke. However, while there was limited support available for me, I now realise that when I was homeless, I wasn't doing anything to help myself and my situation. I wasn't doing anything to help my mental health. I was expecting people to do it for me. I was expecting the doctor to just give me a magic pill. I was expecting my support worker to just give me everything I needed. That wasn’t the right attitude to have. I realised I had to take control of my own life. And that’s what I did.

My children are 100% the reason why I sorted my life out. The thought of them kept me going. In fact, I can probably tell you right now I'd be dead without them. Looking back, how I made it out the other side is a miracle to me. I feel like two different people. I even refer to myself by different names. My Christian name is David. However, I absolutely despise being called this, and now I always go by ‘Dave.’ Going by a different name provides me with mental separation from who I was back then. Now I’m a productive member of society, involved in charity work to do with the homeless. In 2019 I was given the property I’m in now and I also started volunteering for the charity Boomerang Cardiff, which was established by a friend of mine. He had also been homeless, and he understood that there was no help for people who just fell on hard times. He’s really helped me change my way of thinking. If you think positively, if you act positively, and if you do positive things, positive things will start happening to you, and you will naturally start to feel better.

For me, going to see a doctor and taking a tablet was not a remedy for sorting out my mental health – I needed to tackle the root problems. When you’re stuck in a cycle of negative thinking, it’s very difficult to rewire your brain to think differently. Don’t get me wrong – I’m not there yet. However, I don’t think I’m too far away, either. That gives me hope, and I hope it gives hope to other people too. It’s no longer just about me, but about who I can save. There are people out there taking their own lives in situations where they don’t need to be. I am living proof that you can actively try and change things – you can change your life if you really want to.

Ever since I was diagnosed six years ago, not a day has gone by where I haven’t thought about my bipolar disorder. It is so intrinsically woven into my daily routine that it’s impossible not to think about. I wake up, take my meds and pause to evaluate how I think I’m feeling. Every evening, before I go to bed, I take my meds and note down in my journal where I think I am on my mood scale. Throughout the day I question my reactions; am I hypomanic or have I had too much caffeine? Am I tired or are my emotions draining away because I’m getting depressed again? At this point, I’m pretty used to it and thanks to therapy it doesn’t bother me too much anymore. In fact, in a lot of ways being so in tune with my brain is very useful; I can often spot a mood shift pretty early on which can help me try to prevent it spiralling out of control.  

It’s a very strange and unusual time for everyone, whether you struggle with your mental health or you don’t. Due to lack of contact with the outside world, I’m spending a lot of time stuck in my head and that’s not always a good place for me to be, especially when my usual distractions, such as meeting up with friends, have been taken away from me. With a mental illness like bipolar it can be easy to spend your life fearing the next mood shift. There’s a lot of unknowns and, as someone who likes to be in control, that can generate a lot of anxiety. Like I said, therapy can be really useful for this but there’s also an element of just accepting it (easier said than done, I know). Life is full of unknowns and this is just another to add to the mix. I have a tendency to overthink and end up convincing myself that my mood is shifting when, in realty, I’m perfectly fine.

Grounding techniques help control symptoms by turning attention away from thoughts, memories, or worries, and refocusing on the present moment. At first, I wasn’t into it; I’m not a person who finds deep breathing and meditation particularly easy or useful. However, I have learned that there are so many other kinds of techniques and I’ve managed to find some that work for me. A huge one has been doing single-player card games like solitaire and spider on my computer. It sounds lame, I know, but it’s been a genuinely helpful tool to distract me from my anxiety. I haven’t been taking advantage of the daily exercise as much as I should have, but I find putting in some headphones, listening to music and going for a walk (or a run if that’s more your style) is a fantastic way of getting out of my head for a while. I’m taking advantage of this time to learn more about myself and my mental health, but I’m also learning that it’s okay to take a break sometimes and if there are days where I feel like doing nothing other than watching a film and cuddling my cat, that’s totally valid. I don’t always have to be active; taking time out to relax and have a breather is essential for me.

Last September a huge change in my life pushed me into having a manic episode that lasted nine weeks. I was hospitalised in Ealing after being found diving into a baggage drop off at Stanstead airport, having hallucinated all day and thinking I was in a dream. I felt on a high and was overeating. At one point I became so unwell I was put into solitary confinement for three days - my parents weren’t allowed to visit and the only thing in the room was a mattress. Food was slid into me and there weren’t any windows.

When medication started to work I experienced the depressive side of bipolar. Over Christmas my body caught up on the sleep I had missed out on for two months - falling asleep at 9pm and waking up at 12 noon. Even during the hours I was awake I was exhausted and after a month or so I became depressed. March/April have been my hardest months - feeling so suicidal I couldn’t even maintain my personal hygiene, brushing my teeth felt like an effort and all my medication was given to me on a daily basis as I didn’t feel responsible enough to have the whole packet. I went to bed at 6:30pm and my days consisted of two home visits a day from the NHS Crisis team. Eventually in May I started to see little flashes of light from mood stabilisers. Quetiapine (an antipsychotic) and lithium (a mood stabiliser) have ended up being my combination. I also made the decision to take a few months off from anything, just to focus on maintaining good health.

I wanted to write a post to say that if anyone out there is experiencing depression- you can feel better. I couldn’t imagine it when I was so low, I had lost all hope and the only thing keeping me going was googling bipolar inspiration stories/quotes and looking up fat cat pictures to make me laugh. Everyone’s mental health is unique, but speaking about it does wonders. The crisis team got me out of the hugest hole through communication, and I would recommend this to anyone currently suffering. I now just do CBT once every two weeks. I’m back to feeling normal, only having the same highs and lows as most other people. I’ve felt like this for four months now so am obviously on the right combination of meds for me. The year before this all happened I was misdiagnosed with generalized anxiety disorder and panic disorder. My medication now has also stopped these symptoms. Friends and family support was crucial to me — and were the first people to recognise my recovery. I understand in my lifetime I may have another episode, but am currently enjoying not focusing on that prospect but instead channelling my energy into breaking stigmas and raising awareness where I can. I have since set up the page ‘Viva Fever’ on Instagram.

My page is a safe space for anyone experiencing issues – and a great platform on which to read other stories and feel normal. I have worked with Mind in the past organising talks at Shoreditch House, and hope to now host my own and create a London community for anyone to dip in and out of if they find the page helpful. I just held my first ever Viva Fever event – an hour-long Sunday stroll along the canal, coffee to finish! When I was anxious or depressed, doing something as little as a walk gave me a huge feeling of accomplishment, and I hope followers will see the potential in these opportunities I am creating. I called the page Viva Fever. My middle name is Viva, which also means live. It’s a silly name as I don’t want the organisation to ever become too serious. Even at my lowest I’d be able to detach from the situation quite regularly and laugh at the fact my mind was strong enough to make me scared to go to Tesco. The mind can put you in the most ridiculous scenarios, and we can’t let it win. Tescos should not be scary!

I have had serious mental health problems most of my life. I have a diagnosis of borderline personality disorder and experienced depression, mania, delusions and hallucinations. I have attempted suicide on several occasions and completed numerous acts of self-harm. I have spent ten years of my life as a psychiatric inpatient including four years in a high security hospital and nine months in prison following a serious crime. However, I have also worked, completed a degree and teaching qualifications, have friends and interests and live independently. I probably look and seem ordinary and ‘normal’ to most people who come across me. So, which one of these descriptions is really me? Of course, they both are. All of us are a complicated mixture of personality traits. We all have our qualities and our difficulties. We all deserve to have our views respected and be loved for who we are as well as having to take responsibility when make mistakes or harm others.

This is no different for anyone who has received a mental health diagnosis. I am not just a disordered collection of symptoms nor is anybody else. I suspect most people have not heard of borderline personality disorder let alone understand it. It is a complicated condition and sufferers are often misunderstood and unfairly treated by others including some mental health professionals. Although I have met many kind and skilful mental health professionals sadly I am where I am today largely despite the mental health treatment I have had not because of it. I have been described as “attention seeking”. It is a normal part of being human to want and need attention. If someone is asking for attention in unhelpful ways it would be more constructive if others saw this as a response to traumatic experiences rather than punishing and ignoring the person. When I have used unhealthy behaviour to communicate my feelings what has helped has been feeling listened to and having my distress taken seriously and understood. I now work teaching adults with learning disabilities who can find it difficult to communicate their needs and my experiences help me recognise that challenging behaviour is usually about trying to communicate feelings rather than seeking attention and treat them with compassion and understanding. I have been described as “difficult”. I can be difficult to understand particularly as my mood can change very quickly and extremely with no obvious cause, but I would describe myself as resilient and tenacious. I have managed a mental health advocacy service, worked with adults with dementia and learning disabilities and have always tried to stand up for other’s rights and enable their voices to be heard even in the face of opposition. It was difficult for me to get a job again after spending so long in hospital, but I persevered and coped with many rejections.

I have been described as “lacking empathy”. It is true that I find it difficult to connect with other people, but I am kind, compassionate and fair. In my work I am passionate about treating everyone as unique individuals with their own individual needs and I think that I am a good friend to others. I have been described as “lacking the ability to see things through”. It is true that I have had problems knowing who I am and what I want to do in life, but I have also completed a degree course, teaching qualifications and worked full time. When my life has broken down it has been because I have struggled on for a long time not feeling able to tell anybody how I feel until things have become unbearable. People with a borderline personality disorder are often seen as “violent”not helped by how they are sometimes portrayed in popular culture and the media. I did commit a crime that threatened violence (although I didn’t harm anyone), but I am in the minority. People with any mental health diagnosis are much more likely to harm themselves than anyone else. They are also much more likely to be the victims of crime than the perpetrators. Those who have presented a risk to others should, of course, be contained for as long as society deems they need to be punished, treated or still present a risk to others. However, they are still people with the same emotions and needs as everybody else. Most of them have family and friends who care about them and most of them will, at some point, re-enter society.

I remember watching a T.V. advert for a charity asking for money to support abused children whilst an inpatient in a high security hospital. As I looked around the room at the faces staring at the images of traumatised children it was as if they were looking through a window into their own pasts and I suspected most people would not be so keen to donate money to support their care and treatment now as they would to the representations of their childhood selves. While I still have some difficulties and things about my life I want to change and see a therapist to help with this I have survived and achieved a lot as have many others with a borderline personality disorder diagnosis. I am a person just like everybody else, not a monster who needs to be controlled and contained. Everybody has the right to feel understood, accepted and loved for who they are and above all have their voice heard.

Since a young age, I had always felt that I was different, I seemed to feel more than others around me, everything was in extremes; love to obsession, joy to euphoria, anger to rage. I couldn't take hold of my emotions; they always had a hold of me. Of course this is hard to see in a teenager as there is typically already so much going on in life at this age, so this was simply put down to me being a "teenager", rather than the uncontrollable moods of bipolar disorder. It wasn’t until my early twenties whilst studying and working, that it all became too much and I had an episode of depression which made me feel like my life was slipping away from me; an empty feeling was all I had left. I went to my GP and was told I had unipolar depression; was given medication, put on a waiting list for counselling and sent on my way. But I couldn't get rid of the feeling, that there was more to it.

I continued to see my GP to air my concerns and asked to be referred to the mental health team, which seemed to fall on deaf ears. It took three isolating, scary and frustrating years to get my final diagnosis of bipolar disorder type 2. The first thing I felt was relief. Then came the realisation of what this diagnosis meant. This wasn't going to be a one-time occurrence. There was no quick fix or cure; I was going to have this illness for the rest of my life. This was too difficult for some closest to me to accept, which led to my relationship with my then partner coming to an end. But being diagnosed gave me a better understanding of why I felt the way I did. I could now start to get the proper help, support and advice l needed.

My bipolar continues to have a massive impact on my daily life, both positive and negative. On the positive side, it's given me the chance to be creative, which is where my love of plants stems from; finding a new form of therapy, through gardening. The opportunity to share my passion for plants and experiences of living with bipolar has given me greater empathy and understanding. Through reflecting and sharing my own struggles, I'm able to relate to what other people may also be going through. On the flip side, just when you feel you're beginning to get on top of things; bipolar rears its head with; hypomania, making me irritable, angry and paranoid. This then leaves me depressed, anxious, out of work and having to hit the reset button again. My difficulties in keeping a job, turn to further worries of not being stable enough to have a family and that if I do, how will my illness impact on their lives. These thoughts can be very paralysing and coupled with agoraphobia, have stopped me from leaving the house. Medication has helped, as has having someone close to me learning and understanding my triggers with me. But I've had to learn to adapt and manage my bipolar myself; finding new forms of therapy. This is where discovering and growing plants has helped change my perspective on life and my ability to cope.

This is the hardest thing to live with. To know that seeing me live with bipolar has caused them pain, hurt, upset, fear, anxiety; to think that there may have been times when they could have felt unsafe, doubted my love and commitment to them, blamed themselves, breaks me a little more every day. Rapid cycling bipolar disorder means swinging between hypomania and depression regularly. I wake up unsure of where I will be today - manic, depressed or functioning normally. I have to constantly censor my behaviour. As with everything, there are ups and downs, good days and bad days. But never days where bipolar is not there with me, sitting on my shoulder haunting me as I play with my children, bath my babies, read my eldest a bedtime story. Every day is a battle. As with every battle, no two days are the same. Not all days end in disaster. Some days there are victories. For me, those victories are the little moments where my youngest toddles over to me and asks for a cuddle, or my eldest looks at me and says ‘Mumma I love you.’ These are the moments I treasure, but there are many more that cause me sadness and pain. I take medication every day for my condition rapid cycling bipolar disorder. Each morning when I wake up, I take these tiny little pills that are supposed to make it all better. They don’t. They help lessen the extremes. But I still have to fight every day to maintain balance. For the most part, I enjoy the hypomania stage. The energy it gives me, the love for life and enthusiasm for everything. My little people love it too, at first. They enjoy my energy and enthusiasm. They thrive off my love for life and enjoy the endless hours of carefully constructed play and learning opportunities I provide for them.

Until it becomes too much. Until I become too much. They become overwhelmed and exhausted, then unsettled and finally apprehensive about being near me. On occasions maybe even slightly afraid of me because by now the hypomania isn’t fun for any of us anymore. I have become obsessive and demanding, everything must be done exactly as and when I need it to be. My expectations become unrealistic, and I expect them to react and behave in the ways I anticipate. Eventually, I become angry that things are not how they should be, that I can’t control everyone and everything around me. I become irrational and snappy when they make a minor mistake such as spilling a drink at the dinner table because they won’t sit still or falling and hurting themselves after I have given warnings. And then, at those times when they most need my love and comfort, they get my anger, my irrationality and my coldness. No sooner has this occurred then I want to take it back. But it is done. Of course, they forgive and forget. I apologise and explain. But it does not change it or fix it. Next comes the fall from hypomania. The need to be alone, the anger that no one understands, the feelings of worthlessness and self-hatred. Sometimes I go out on my own and walk in the dark. Sometimes I drink too much. Sometimes I hurt myself. I am crying out for help but no one can hear me. After this, the depression kicks in. I complete day to day tasks but there is no engagement, no enthusiasm, no feeling. I don’t give my little people the attention or love they deserve. I care for them, but I can’t connect with them. Again, I reach out for help but as I cannot bring myself to actually ask for help outright, I am left to fight alone. But I have found a friend who has many similarities to myself and who I have found a huge strength. Without my friend I probably could not cope. Knowing that I have a friend who I can confide in and who can confide in me, someone who I can just ask for a hug from, go for a walk with, be in companionable silence with or talk about general rubbish with, is a great comfort. It does get better though, sometimes quickly, sometimes slowly, sometimes after what seems like an eternity. Occasionally it gets worse first and I don’t want to carry on anymore. But it does get better.

Then I can be OK for a while - still facing situations that trigger me every day, but coping. It is during these times where I give my absolute all to my children, trying to be the best parent I can be. Every day I set my parenting expectations so high. On some of my good days I may meet them, on others I fall short. But the one thing that never falls short is how much love I have for my two little people and how I would give my everything to them. I just have to hope and pray that this is enough.

The last decade (my thirties) was a time that was dominated by extreme moods, both high and low. In spite of having good friends and a loving family, I felt a deep-seated sense of loneliness. In 2009, aged 31 I was diagnosed with Bipolar Disorder and spent the following 6 years in and out of psychiatric hospitals with bouts of mania and psychosis.

During serious depressions when I’d spend literally weeks under the duvet feeling unable to communicate with friends and family, I’d confide in him that I was struggling and his brief but kind messages helped me take small steps to keep going. However my attachment to him at times was such that on several occasions, shortly before I was due to see him at a public gig or festival, I would get over-excited, lose sleep and end up in a manic phase. During the height of mania, my obsession for him drove me to do reckless things. For example, in 2011 I escaped from hospital (on his birthday) and jumped off Waterloo bridge (This was not a suicide attempt but an act that occurred while I was suffering from euphoric psychosis). Perhaps the start of my road to recovery was my 2015 admission to The Priory (which was funded by the NHS on account of there being no available beds in the local NHS hospitals). My stay at The Priory, as you might expect, was a far less traumatizing experience than being on an NHS psychiatric ward. 

It has not been a totally smooth ride since leaving The Priory, but a few critical elements were put in place there which have aided my recovery and helped establish a stable mood which has been an essential component in rebuilding my life following many years of chaos. I believe that accepting that I’d have to take meds long-term and finding the ones that worked for me was pivotal. From there I was able to maintain a more stable mood and with support from my friends, family and my local community mental health team, I began to re-build my life. I’m fairly sensible about diet, exercise, caffeine and alcohol and haven’t touched cannabis in six years. I have learned to moderate my intake of all things that are appealing and therefore generally bad for your health. This included, during some periods, limiting the time I spent listening to the radio.

I was 23 years old when I was finally diagnosed with bipolar (or manic depression as it was known then) and my reaction was gratitude. It was during the second year of my film degree and, due to the extremes of my behaviour throughout my first year, I was lucky to be alive.

On my bad days, I felt I was a pathetic coward who didn't deserve to breathe and on my good days I believed I was a god in waiting. I also believed that the strange feelings and visions I experienced throughout my teens were my godly powers leeching through my human skin and that one day I would reveal myself in a flash of angelic light like a mental butterfly. Upon completing my course the next logical step, I thought, was to move to Glasgow and hide in a flat for a year. After life in a small village, where everyone knew each other's business, it was amazing to be in a place where no one knew who I was. I would go for days without leaving the flat and I spent every waking moment living out entire lifetimes in my mind. I knew for a fact carved in stone that I did not want to work. I did not have time. I still had too much thinking to do. In a state of desperation I hastily applied to do a film degree in Newport, South Wales purely because it meant that no one would ask me to get a job. I would always change my behaviour to suit the company I was keeping and I felt that I was allowed to hate people with a passion but if they hated me back then it only reinforced every negative thought I had about myself. In Glasgow I had made it my mission not to know anyone but in Newport I decided that I was going live as the real me and not worry what anyone thought. It turns out the real me was someone who self-medicated with alcohol and drugs, stepped in front of moving cars and set fire to his hand because he genuinely believed that his god skin could not and would not burn. I had episodes of such tremendous highs that I didn't even sleep. I used to pass out on a regular basis and deem it as rest. During my lows I would lock myself in my room for days on end and turn my bed away from my door because I feared what lay on the other side.

I was in the system and I could turn over the responsibility of living my life to professionals because they were the experts. If they had offered to shut me away in a basement for the rest of my life I would have locked the door myself. I was so happy with my new label that I decided that I would tell everyone, but it turned out that 23 years ago my University didn't have a mental health policy. When I told them that I had been diagnosed their assumption was that I would be leaving them. I told them that I didn't want to leave but the truth was neither of us knew what my diagnosis meant. After a brief back and forth we eventually agreed that I would stay on the course but I wouldn't go to lectures any more.

The internet was in its infancy and mental illness was one of those words, like cancer, that was meant to be whispered but I was shouting it from the rooftops. I became obsessed with being the perfect patient but frustratingly the only information I had access to about my condition was from my Psychiatrist and that was purely a list of symptoms and drug regimens. I had no one to talk to. I had a million questions and no one to answer them. And unlike now I couldn’t just ask Google. As I slowly ground through the system I became less and less relevant to the conversation. There was a recognised treatment for my condition and I was prescribed Lithium, which I took religiously, to suppress its harmful effects. I was a good patient. I took the pills, gave up the drink, submitted myself for regular blood tests and stayed away from the University. It was the hollowest of victories. I thought that receiving a diagnosis would mean that things would get better. But I was only made to feel lucky that I was allowed to live amongst the public at all. Then one day everything changed. A friend of mine met a man in his fifties on holiday and during the conversation, my diagnosis came up. Apparently, he smiled and told her to pass on a message.

Those words jump-started my recovery. It was the first time I felt somebody understood what I was going through. I did miss the highs. Despite the doctors calling them a symptom and telling me that they were more likely to kill me than the lows, I missed them every day – and this man knew that and wasn't ashamed to tell a stranger. That was the day I decided that I wouldn't live my life as a victim of my condition. I was going to be a survivor like him. I am someone with bipolar, not simply Paul the bipolar person. It is part of me not all of me. Fortunately, things have changed. Most universities have mental health policies and manic depression is now called bipolar disorder. Public awareness of mental illness has been raised through campaigns like Time to Change and, whilst the service is far from perfect, at least information and voices of people affected are just an internet search away. I don't know how my life would have been any different if I had access to those voices all those years ago, but I do know I wouldn't have felt as alone.

When I was 15, I started suffering from depression and anxiety. My heart would race, I couldn’t sleep and it was so debilitating I had to take six weeks off school in my GCSE year. I still got my GCSEs and I recovered for a while. However the following months were filled with a manic, high episode and then a depressive episode featuring psychosis which led me to be hospitalised voluntarily on an adolescent mental health unit. It was there, aged just 16 years old, that a psychiatrist diagnosed me with bipolar affective disorder, which runs in my family. Bipolar is a serious mood disorder where sufferers can experience depression and low phases lasting for months and manic, high phases which can make sufferers feel out of control due to the symptoms. I am now 29, but when diagnosed at 16, this felt like a life sentence. I was a shy teenager, always wanting to fit in and now I was told I would have a chronic mental illness, have to take constant medication to keep well and keep regular tabs on my moods. What I didn’t know was that due to the severity of my illness, the doctors told my parents they didn’t know if I would be well enough to go to university. I proved them wrong, but this is what I wish I had been told when first diagnosed.

I go for months between episodes and on my medication sometimes have no Bipolar episodes at all. In society, people think being bipolar means your mood changes a hundred times a day. This is not the case. Often months and years pass between episodes because everyone with the illness is different. Some people do rapid cycle with their moods and for others it’s much slower. Let’s change that stigma.

It took me almost 11 years of living with the disorder before I found the right medication to keep my episodes at bay, and my moods properly stabilised. I experienced severe depressive and manic episodes when on the wrong medication for me. Mood stabilisers, such as Lithium, really can help. When I changed from a teenager into a woman, my previous mood stabiliser Carbamazepine stopped holding me and I became unwell. Make sure you chat with your psychiatrist about the right medicine for you, and don’t be afraid of drugs like Lithium- it has saved my life. Everything is trial and error and you may also need to be on a combination of anti-depressants or anti-psychotics. These medications all have side effects but if it helps your mental health significantly it can be worth it, just make sure you do it under the guidance of a psychiatrist.

In 2014, I was hospitalised for a severe manic episode and was very unwell. It took me the best part of a year and a half to recover from the affect. However, since recovery I have worked for mental health charities, started a blog Be Ur Own Light (www.beurownlight.com) to tackle mental health stigma and blogged for Rethink Mental Illness, Time to Change, Bipolar UK and other publications such as the Huffington Post UK. Living with bipolar disorder means you have to be resilient. You can live. Yes, you may have other mental health challenges (I suffer from anxiety) but you can still achieve what you want, however big or small. Live your dreams. When you are first diagnosed with bipolar disorder or suspect you may have it due to your moods and symptoms, you can feel incredibly out of control and overwhelmed. The most important thing to do is to take it day by day and get the right support. You don't have to live a miserable, reduced life, rather with the right help and combination of medication, therapy and support networks - including a good medical team- you can thrive. Things may feel bleak and scary. However, you can move forward into the light. Be kind to yourself. Your illness is not your fault and you can recover again. That’s what I wish I had known when my journey began and what I want to share with you. 

Since I was about 18, I’ve suffered with mental health problems. I went to see the doctor and was diagnosed with depression but sometimes I’d feel a bit ‘high’. My friends and family didn’t really know much about mental health or illness so when I‘d go a little wild they’d just think.

Through researching, I discovered how to manage my illness that I will I have for the rest of my life. And what I discovered helped were things like eating healthily – no one ever wants to hear this – but, eating healthily, exercise, practicing mindfulness and meditation. And I can remember the first time I heard that I thought that sounds a little hippy’. 

I used to be a secondary school teacher but when I was ill, around 2013, I had to stop teaching. I couldn’t continue as I was. But by that point, as I had been researching for 2 years, I applied for a job working in mental health and now I have the honour of working in the mental health sector and I find that helps me, too, with my condition. Because...I can help other people now. Because of the research, I did... Because I know what it’s like to feel mentally unwell and what it feels like to have people not understand. It’s a privilege to be able to educate and train people so that they understand. If they are suffering themselves, or it’s someone they know, I can help inform them and help get rid of the stigma surrounding mental health problems and that’s very important to me. So that’s my story and hopefully it will be of help to somebody. It’s just very important, I think, to get rid of the stigma. Everyone suffers from the flu or something at some point in their lives. Everyone at some point will suffer from some type of loss or a heartache. It’s vital to take care of our mental health and I feel very fortunate to be able to help others and I feel very lucky that I have that understanding now. So: research, eat healthily, try some exercise, and perhaps try some Meditation. And maybe that will help you, too.

One of the things that surprises people when I talk about my experiences with mental illness – other than the revelation that no, weirdly, I can’t just cure it with a positive mental attitude – is how long it took me to be diagnosed. It was nearly ten years between my first experience of mental illness and my eventual diagnosis with bipolar – ten years of mental health wards, doctor’s surgeries and, most frequently, lying motionless under a duvet. This isn’t uncommon – the Centre for Mental Health found that children go, on average, ten years before receiving a diagnosis. Of course the reasons for this are complex – anxieties around talking about mental health, GPs unfamiliarity with more severe conditions, cuts to specialist services and more all play a part in diagnoses being missed. For me, it was a combination of factors. It took me a long time to even visit a doctor, to begin with. What I was feeling didn’t seem normal to me, but maybe it was – discussions around mental health were far less open when I was a teenager, and so I had no real frames of reference. When I worked out that my inability to concentrate, my constant and viciously low moods and my addiction to self-harm were not, in fact, every day phenomena, I did, finally, get the courage to visit my GP.

Being miserable, he said, was a universal teenage experience. Everyone’s moody when they’re 14, he said! Nobody wants to get out of bed! Self-harm, the most immediately worrying element of my problems, was written off as a fad. This experience, combined with the fact that my peers at school would also make fun of the fact I self-harmed, was probably one of the most formative - and negative - of my young life. It was only when I was 19, and going through a full-blown psychotic episode, that I sought help again. And, in more recent years, I’ve experienced similar treatment – one GP told me, in the midst of the worst depressive episode of my life, that I should “see how I feel in two weeks and then come back”, not understanding that in two weeks I might be dead. Halfway through my talking to her about how I was feeling, she stopped me to say that my medical notes stated that I smoked. Would I be interested in quitting?

My first experience led me to doubt myself and, later, to not seek treatment until it was too late. My second unsurprisingly left me feeling even more depressed, even less able to cope and completely phobic of seeking help elsewhere. Luckily, there are a number of things you can do to prevent this from happening to you. You can’t (or shouldn’t) diagnose yourself, but reading up on and researching mental illness can be a good way for you to work out what it is you might be experiencing. Logging your own experiences can also be helpful - noting the times and dates of changes in mood or problematic behaviours can give your doctor an insight into what you’re experiencing. Writing things down like this can also allay anxieties about going to talk to a doctor – you won’t forget what you want to say, and you can present a confident and convincing case for the treatment you need and deserve. If this doesn’t work, don’t be put off – you can see a new GP in the same surgery or even switch to a different surgery if you’re really uncomfortable. You can also – as I have done, once – complain about your treatment. And, despite my negative experiences, I’ve also visited doctors who have been helpful, compassionate and empathetic. This, generally, is the norm, so if you’re seeking help for the first time then please don’t be put off. Getting the right treatment, whether that’s medication, therapy or a combination of the two, isn’t always a fast or simple process, and it may be some time before you settle into treatment. But seeking help is an important first step in the proactive management of your mental health: don’t feel anything but proud of yourself for doing such a brave, strong and extraordinarily difficult thing.

So, I should start with a dramatic experience which happened about four years ago, the culmination of a bipolar episode. I became obsessed and scared and I didn’t sleep and I thought that I was being followed by the Secret Police. I ended up driving in my mum’s car around a race track. I was followed by the police and quite rightly arrested and sectioned. And it was a very traumatic experience particularly in the hospital afterwards. 

I was sectioned aged 17 and 19 as well and I think for the same condition and similar experiences. I think that from aged 19 to 36 when I got into recovery from alcoholism I basically medicated my bipolar with alcohol and one thing fuelled the other. The thinking of the alcoholic and the thinking of someone that suffers from bipolar and the drinking itself all joined together to make a big mess. Life was difficult for me and, of course, very much so for those around me.  I learned to forgive myself for that and anybody that suffers from addiction or mental health should learn to do so because they are illnesses. My daily experience is that even when I’m well I am too much in the fast lane or not in any lane.  I’m either smoking 40 a day or none at all.  I’m either sending a million emails or none.  I can’t stop doing, planning, scheming or working but I do find that I have a slight tendency to, sort of, reach a crescendo and then crash. It’s like a daily mini version of the dramatic episodes which ended in hospitalisation and weeks recuperating in bed.  

I try to just look after myself and be kind to myself and I think that’s what anyone that suffers from it should do. And don’t be embarrassed or ashamed to tell your employer you need a day off just like if you had a broken leg.

And music and medication and my children and therapy and anything that’s available to me help and helping other people helps and Mind and the things that they do help. So, my suggestion to anybody that’s suffering from these conditions is understand them, accept them and you can get over them. And help beat the stigma by talking about it.  And of course I would suggest if anybody feels capable and willing then do your own selfie and join the Mind YouTube channel.

I was in my late 20s. I had a first class degree and a Masters from Oxford, and was working towards my doctorate. All my life I had wanted to be an academic, to do research, the one thing I knew I was really good at. And the goal was finally in sight. But the seeds of what was about to go wrong had already been planted. I hadn’t started my Masters straight after my undergraduate degree. A mix of bad advice and pig-headedness about what I wanted to study meant that my application for funding had been rejected two years in a row before finally being accepted. And because I was so one-track on what I wanted to do, I had stayed those two years in Oxford, paying the highest rents in the country and not really supporting myself by doing as much teaching as I could get my hands on.

When I succeeded in obtaining a full fees and maintenance grant at the third time of asking, I thought I had it cracked. But the sums didn’t stack up. The so-called full maintenance grant was around £5,500. Rent was £400 per month, and because I was a graduate, that meant for the full 12 months. Out of the remaining £700 I not only had to live, pay all my bills, and buy books – I had to service the overdraft I’d racked up trying to survive the previous two years. This was the first big lesson I had about banks – they treat you very differently as a graduate from an undergraduate. But although they had started wanting repayments, they were still willing to see me as a good bet. So when I started my doctorate, I was able to take out a £10,000 “development loan” to augment the maintenance grant that now only covered rent.

By this time my mental health, which had been fairly good since a major manic episode in my second year as an undergraduate, was taking a turn for the worse.  was beginning to obsess about things, specifically about buying things I thought I needed if I was going to be a proper academic. That was how I ended up with, among other things, 23 bibles. With binge spending spiralling out of control, a £10,000 loan didn’t last long. I was still teaching as much as I could, but that left little time actually to study, and when mania tipped over into the inevitable crash to a massive low, everything collapsed. I hid myself away from the world. I didn’t answer the phone and I wouldn’t open the post, and debt after debt stacked up, with £1800 of bank charges added to the mix.

And then the 3 years I’d been given to study were over. The doctorate was nowhere near complete. And the bank now required instant repayment of the development loan that had earned me not a qualification but hundreds of pounds a month of repayments. That was the last that was ever heard of my dream to be an academic. The need to earn every penny I could to keep the debts serviced took over, and ever since I have been taking any job my health could cope with that would enable me to come close to staying on top of the debt. There are lots of things to reflect on about this time, but two things are really worth taking away. The first is that as a graduate, and one whose mental ill health made being with people difficult, I was properly on my own for the first time. That made it very hard to spot what was happening until I was a long way into it.

Second, to the banks you’re either a good bet or you’re a bad situation they’re desperate to claw everything they can from. Once my study finished that was it. Even when I started, they wouldn’t put my undergraduate debts on hold. I was destined to fail. And now, when I’m finally well enough to fulfil my potential, it’s too late. For obvious reasons I don’t earn enough to support myself through study. I’ve been written off in my 40s – and the stupid thing is the banks will get less out of me in the long run as a result.

There is always a feeling of absolute failure when you can’t achieve a simple human task. Speaking to another person for example; it’s the most basic form of communication. But I spent over half of my life pinned to the floor in fear if anyone looked in my direction. I was 18 years old when I was diagnosed with Social Anxiety Disorder. The term seemed pretty lame in comparison to the actual impact it was having on my life. I’d just scraped through my A-Levels with a poor attendance record, had no friends and had quit university after just one semester. I don’t think I could have gotten any deeper into the darkness of depression. At first I tried attempting several forms of therapy under the care of a psychiatrist, but it was tough. There wasn’t as much understanding about the condition as there is now and I was told I would grow out of it. Sadly, it just seemed to get worse the older I got.

By the time I was 21 I was a complete recluse. I barely left my home and hid if anyone came over to visit. The panic attacks were crippling and many times I wanted to give up. The hardest part for me was seeing others doing so well. Social media was just starting to take off and I could see those I once knew, graduating university, starting careers and travelling the world. I just wanted to be like them, but every time I tried I would be beaten down by fear. I was unemployed for a long time and spent every day trying to overcome my phobiawith cognitive behavioural therapy. I was further diagnosed with Bipolar Disorder when I was 26. It was hard at times and I felt so worthless; but eventually I felt like I had reached a point where I could get a job. At the age of 28 I got a job working for an internet marketing company as a junior marketer. Having absolutely no experience, I was employed because of the skills I’d taught myself in computer programming and SEO. I was still shy around others, but wasn’t crippled by anxiety. I enjoyed the first couple of weeks and felt hopeful that my life had just turned a corner.

Unfortunately, just three weeks into my role, I happened to mention to my boss I had Bipolar Disorder during a discussion about mental illness. I knew straight away I’d made a massive mistake. Just 24 hours later I was called into a meeting with him. It was the most uncomfortable thirty minutes of my life, with anxiety flooding my system once again. I knew I was no longer wanted and handed in my resignation. That experience left me back at home with depression. I didn’t just dislike myself, I despised myself. Who would want someone like me? I was a waste of time and space. One day I was reading a newspaper about a charity which helped people into self-employment. It was something I’d always thought about doing, but my confidence in myself was at an all-time low. It took a good few months before I found the courage to apply. Most of it came from the growing frustration of every day being the same; I just wanted to break free. I decided in the end not to think too much about it, focus on the goal of being financially independent and hit the send button! Once I did it there was part relief and part absolute anxiety, but my anxiety was short lived once I realised I was capable of doing this.

I set up my business in design and illustration at the age of 31. I was also diagnosed with Asperger Syndrome just a few days before I began trading. I was incredibly nervous about working for myself, but also very excited. I started off with one customer and she referred me on to another four. It was hard work, but I finally had a reason to get out of bed in the morning. Business went really well and before long I was being invited to share my story with both business leaders and celebrities. It was terrifying at first, but actually really rewarding. The highlight of my entrepreneurial life was seeing Simon Cowell wearing a pair of sunglasses I’d designed at an Award Show. I also won an award that day and had to speak to 2000 people, including Prince Charles. I’ve been self-employed for four years now and have recently set up my second business, Brave & The Bold. I’ve been lucky enough to be accepted on to a business accelerator programme and currently share a fantastic office with 70 other businesses. I’ve made it my intention to donate a percentage of our profits each year to Mind. Becoming self-employed has been a rewarding and life-changing experience. There have been challenging times, but it’s so worthwhile when you see your customers walk away with a smile on their face. I would say to anyone thinking about becoming self-employed; just take a leap of faith and go for it. Here are my top tips for starting your own business: 1) Write a business plan before you start. Even if it’s just some simple goals initially. Preparing can help stop you becoming overwhelmed in the early days. 2) Stick with something you love. For me, there is no better feeling than being paid for something you are passionate about. 3) Find someone who is willing to help you. I had a mentor for the first two years and it helped to talk to someone who had more experience than me. Most enterprise agencies can help you find a volunteer mentor. The best part is that your skills are the only thing you’re judged on. It’s entirely up to you how far you want to go. It’s a great feeling to prove your doubters wrong!

I was diagnosed with bipolar. I felt strangely relieved with the diagnosis. It almost felt like an answer, or an explanation for all of the bizarre thoughts I had racing around my mind. Now I knew what I was dealing with. I had something to work with. Once you know what you’re dealing with you can start to manage it. At the beginning of this ‘high’ everyone thought I was just happy to be able to enjoy life again. As several months before this I had been diagnosed with depression. Severe life-enabling depression. To be honest, I thought the same. I had been in such a dark place. A place I am terrified to go back too. So I was completely unaware of what was happening to me and the chaos I was causing.

The trouble with bipolar is that sometimes it can go undiagnosed. You don’t go to the doctor to tell them you are feeling extremely happy. That you’ve got so much energy and can conquer the world (quite literally). Of course, it depends how ‘high’ you go. The ‘high’ may sound fun, but it can tip over the edge and become very dangerous. Another difficulty with bipolar is that for everyone it can be different. There isn’t a blood test you can do that explains what's happening in your mind, it’s all behavioural. It's hard to diagnose and fully understand something that the eye cannot see. However, just because the eye cannot see it, does not mean it’s not real. Just because you can’t see what’s going on inside someone's head, doesn’t mean it’s not happening. One of the main causes for relapse in patients is due to stopping the medication themselves. Perhaps this is due to the stigma that still surrounds mental health. If someone had another illness such as diabetes or asthma, you wouldn’t hear of them just stopping taking their meds because everything was going well. This stigma could cause people to deny that they are facing a potentially life-threatening illness.

I’m not keen on taking two tablets every day, but if it means I will be able to live my life to the full and enjoy it, I will. It doesn’t change the person I am. It just levels out the chemicals in my brain. Of course, medication isn’t something you should solely rely on. There’s so much more to it than popping a couple of pills and what works for one person, may not work for another. I’m a 23 year old, female, journalism graduate. My life spiralled out of control due to bipolar a year ago. I’d just arrived back from a year in Australia and this was the last thing I’d expected. Mental health can effect anyone and everyone, whether that’s personally or through someone you love. This is why we need to continue to squash the stigma and help each other move forward with knowledge and understanding. 

And I’m getting better at starting to feel the kind of physical sensations, if you like; my hand’s shaking, or, you know, just not being able to sit down, very agitated and things like that. Not being able to sleep very well. My sleep gets disrupted because I’m constantly worrying about things that will never happen and then I think, right, you know, it’s time just to force myself to take, you know, half an hour, an hour, you know, half a day; a day, even, depending on how bad it is just to relax and calm down.

Because I think… I just think of something else that I’ve got to do the next day and then I think, I mustn’t forget that because otherwise I won’t get to sleep. But it’s a vicious circle because once you’ve woken your brain up then you start thinking of 101 things that you need to do tomorrow. So I’ve tried to sort of get rid of the phone, but I’m kind of getting it down to about half an hour before I go to sleep. It’s definitely worth just kind of spending that half an hour of just winding down and then, yes, just being kind to yourself before bed. If I’m out and about and I’ve, you know, I’ve got carers in for mum and I’ve got time away from home and I can instantly go, right, and I can feel something bubbling inside me, sort of thing. I will just go to the gym until I’m an absolute sweaty mess and then you’re just... Completely feel euphoric because it’s got it out of our system. You’ve had the chance to... Because I listen to music all the time at the gym, if I’m angry about anything, I don’t. It’s really funny because you’re busy processing what you were thinking about and so you’ve done that for an hour, which is more than enough time, but you’ve also been focusing on, you know, I’ve got to... Oh, I’ve got to get it done by X time, you know, and you’re sort of half having a race with, you know, the person next to you in the gym. And you’re going, yes, I’m going to beat that person and I get awfully competitive when I’m cross! And, but, yes, and then suddenly it’s gone and you just think, not only has it gone, I’ve dealt with it, tick, you know, that’s brilliant, you know, I’ve done... I’ve dealt with it in a positive way but, you know, I’m getting fit in the process and feel good at the end of it. That is, for feeling very frustrated, that’s probably the best one for me. In terms of just keeping a general kind of equilibrium, I try to kind of insert now, because I thought I never... I don’t have time to do this every day as everyone kind of thinks and I’m fortunate, I guess, because I’ve been structuring my days a little bit differently, kind of not working a sort of nine to five. But I try to spend kind of half an hour or even quarter of an hour a day kind of either go for a walk or practice mindfulness techniques. I’ve found some good websites and apps that you can do on the go or you can do at home. As well as art therapy, basically colouring-in for grown-ups which is an amazing thing, and I never had so much fun colouring flowers in my life, at my age. But it’s just something to focus on, again, and clear your mind and just have something to sort of say, that shows that I took that amount of time because I’ve got that as an end product. And showing yourself that you’re worth spending time on looking after...

And then I realised that I had to focus on myself and to stay well and to stay well and help other people which is what I want to do the most. One thing I find soothing is listening to kind of waves crashing lightly onto a beach as if you were kind of on a nice, sunny holiday because that’s that my kind of, you know, happy place; I wish I was there. So, listening to that almost not sends me to sleep, but relaxes me within probably about 30 seconds to a minute. So I can be mildly sort of narked about something and if I remember quickly enough, I can get that out, you know, put that on my phone and then I’m almost, you know, it’s almost as if by magic I can soothe myself and just... It’s about your breathing, as well. Obviously that helps kind of slowing down your breathing, being more in tune, just focusing on the here and now, listening and focusing your senses. And, yes, savouring, you know, people, things around you.

You know, sometimes when you’re feeling kind of down or agitated and, you know, if one of them kind of sits on you and just starts purring, it’s amazing.I’m cat obsessed so, you know, that really cheers me up. And I find cooking quite therapeutic and it is a creativity in itself. You know, I like doing... If you... If you left, sort of left me alone and I didn’t have any responsibilities, or have to worry about money or anything else, I’d probably just cook, take photographs and, you know, draw and sort of listen to music. Those kind of outputs would be, you know, as well as kind of going for walks and runs, and things, would be, you know, it’s everything that I’m happy doing. I started learning how to cook very young. My dad was a very good cook. He... Yes, he started me cooking when I was about eight, so I learnt how to kind of taste things properly and so my taste developed quite quickly. I sometimes follow recipe books to try new things but then I’ll instantly kind of go off-piste and kind of start adding my own things. And, nine times out of ten, it comes okay, so that’s the main thing. I haven’t poisoned anyone yet. The process is like making a little story, sort of thing. You’re sort of adding different things. You know, you can change it along the way. It doesn’t have to be the same story every time. It’s exciting and you get to eat it at the end of the day, which is amazing. And it brings... I love cooking for other people. I can’t say that I’ve done massive dinner parties, I’m not quite that amazing but when you’ve made something nice... It’s an expression of kind of your love for people, it’s to kind of share it with them, which is quite, ooh. And hope that they like it.

I was awarded my PhD in December 2015. My family came to the ceremony and it was one of the proudest days of my life. It had taken a lot longer though than PhDs are supposed to. This is because I have bipolar disorder. I was diagnosed in May 2009. I had become very ill very quickly. The symptoms I had meant that they were able to make the diagnosis in less than a week. I was lucky getting such a quick diagnosis because I could then start getting treatment. I’ve read that being diagnosed with bipolar can take many years. I was still really unwell for a long time though.

I have a care plan with my doctor now. It includes the agreement that if I have three nights of disturbed sleep in a row I go and see him in the morning. We then decide the best thing to do but usually this involves taking additional medication. Medication has actually been one of my biggest issues. Initially I was prescribed medication only when I was ill. These anti-psychotics although effective, have the unfortunate side effect for me that they make me really tired. I just cannot think straight when I’m on them. It meant that my PhD came to a virtual stand-still each time I started to get unwell. However, I kept raising the issue with the health care professionals that I was seeing. My consultant changed and the new one agreed to try a different approach. I now take two types of mood stabiliser every day. I still take the anti-psychotics when I get unwell but this is much less frequently than before. I know that some people can manage their illness without daily medication. I can’t. I genuinely believe that without this change I would not have finished my PhD. Making the university aware of my illness was another really important factor in getting the PhD. To be honest I was forced into telling them. You have a maximum amount of time to complete a PhD. At one time I was so ill that it was obvious that I would not be able to do any studying for quite a while. I was really worried that this would stop me meeting the deadline. Of course this worry made me feel more and more down. The consultant at the hospital was really great though and wrote the perfect letter to the university explaining the situation. The university in turn were fantastic about everything. In particular they made sure that I had the extra time I needed to complete the PhD. I find being down so much harder than being up. When I am up I just feel great and I feel like I can achieve anything. When I am down it feels like there is a crushing weight and sometimes I feel unable to do anything at all. I was told that the best way to cope with that is to set myself tiny little tasks. This really helps as at least I could feel like I had achieved something.

I am very wary about who I discuss my illness with. Part of this is because I can suffer from terrible paranoia. People also find it hard to understand how you can genuinely believe you are someone else or have special powers when you are really ‘high’, or just how ‘low’ you can feel. It has helped me a lot to discuss my feelings with mental health professionals. However, they aren’t always there. Sometimes I rang the telephone help line they gave me the number for. Just being able to talk to someone in confidence at any time of day or night can help enormously. Getting any kind of qualification is an achievement. However, for me, doing so while managing bipolar disorder felt like much more of one. I kept going because I wanted to prove to myself I could succeed despite having bipolar disorder. I know though I could not have got the PhD without the support of a lot of people. I will always be grateful for this.

I've always been proud to be open about my 'brain demons' – though I have found that as time goes on fewer people seem to be able to understand. And there was a long time where I thought my anxiety would be the biggest challenge I'd face within the walls of my skull... but a couple of years or so ago I had to deal with even more on top of that. My darkness as I call it. I noticed some odd moods and behaviours in myself. After some time I asked the doctor to refer me to secondary/psychiatric care for a check up. I was no stranger to the process after my 10+ years of anxiety, so I understood that it might not be a quick fix, but it felt important. As it turned out, they thought it might be cyclothymia. It was hard to pin down, because I can change from one extreme to another many times in a day when it's at its worst. The moment you ask me what I'm feeling might be very different to what I'd say an hour later.

Skip forward a year or more, and I've changed jobs, lost my longest and most precious relationship, and moved house 11 miles, to another county – which meant my psychiatric care almost went back to square one. My behaviour felt like it was getting worse. I had a constant need to distract myself with stupid things. One time I was going to have a tattoo done after the pub closed by a guy who was so drunk in his chair I couldn't even wake him up. All so I could focus on something that wasn't myself.

Or the time I woke up in a period of mild mania at 4am, showered, dressed well (fake it until you make it, right?), went to the local store and bought two bunches of beautiful sunflowers. I drove to my dad's, knowing he was awake that early, and gave a bunch to him, then drove to my mum's and did the same. When they both spoke later to my sister and realised I'd given them each flowers, they thought I might have been saying some sort of final goodbye. The truth couldn't have been more different, but it hit home to me how worrying my manic actions can seem to people. I felt fine. I always feel fine when I'm up. That's a part of the problem.

To manage my bipolar, I need medication and meditation. In recent years I’ve also found that being with my children is a wonderful leveller, with that paternal instinct helping to carry me through when I am very low. One other thing that I’ve learnt in 23 years of living with bipolar, is that music helps. However, if I go into a psychotic episode I need to be removed from society and I need to be kept away from those that love me. When this happens, I can still play my cello and listen to music when it is best that people don’t see me. I have a vested interest in spotting the signs very early. There is a point of no return for me so I have to stop, say no to people and turn off my phone sometimes. If I am going to help and not hinder Santiago Quartet’s next album I have to be gentle with myself. I have to go for walks, spend time with my children and practice the music rather than just thinking about it. Small, achievable goals are good for all sorts of recovery; from bipolar, OCD, addiction, whatever it may be. This is another gift I get from music. On the forthcoming album we have some beautiful new arrangements by a bandoneon player called Cesar Olguin. I have to learn them. I put them on my music stand and I practice them. This would sound painfully obvious to many people, but for someone with bipolar who thinks about nine things at once (I really don’t get the joke about men not being able to multi-task!) it is a wonderful way of focusing the mind. It is also the best way of getting through dark, depressive days. 

I have learnt to forgive myself for the people I upset and hurt when I was unwell. I have apologised where possible. They may not have forgiven me and I do not need them to. I know I was ill. Other people should not always be expected to understand. Other people are allowed to be sick or angry. My responsibility is, where I am still fortunate enough to have any kind of relationship with them, to show kindness to these people through my actions; turning up on time and not reacting when they are having a bad day. After a recent episode, I stayed in hospital for about 6 weeks and came out to very little work and living upstairs at my Gran’s house. She died very shortly after I left hospital. In fact the trauma of seeing her just after she’d had a stroke, alongside other issues in my personal life, had been one of the major triggers towards my episode. I missed my Gran and I lived alone, isolated. The intense high that lead to my hospitalisation turned into the inevitable low. I had had the manic episode and now it was time for the depression. Music left my life. I didn’t play it. I didn’t listen to it. If I was offered a concert I went but was not present - not listening properly to the other players, which is worse than not going at all in my view! I stayed in bed until 4pm and hated myself for it. So I would do it again. I didn’t escape into drink anymore but I smoked so many cigarettes and ate such dreadful food that all I wanted to do was go back for more ‘duvet diving’. So I would try to stay up late to write a book, which I did finish despite not thinking that it was very good. The medication would kick in and my days were about 7 hours long for weeks at a time. I slept and slept. I felt nothing for anyone or for myself. I was a shell of a person. I hated life.

My name is Jonny and I am a musician, a father, a teacher, a friend, a son and I have bipolar. My condition can be debilitating and frightening, especially for those that love me and care about me. It has resulted in my being sectioned on three occasions. The third time was a career threatening, terrifying experience and my steady demise became very clear to my friends and colleagues on Twitter and Facebook. I went from playing in West End Shows, orchestras, teaching, making music and playing live TV shows to picking up dog-ends and being on benefits. It was an 18-month rollercoaster ride. However, I have learned to live with bipolar, manage it, spot the signs when I am becoming accelerated or heading towards a depression and do something about it. 

“I’ll be right out,” I said. There was a taxi waiting to take me to the radio station. Everything was set. A Mexican guitarist had come from Austria to play live in the studio with us. I was massively excited. I had already done one interview with the radio station and now I wanted to tell them so much more about all the ideas I had, all the schemes.There was only one problem. I was sectioned in a psychiatric hospital and not allowed to leave the ward. The taxi had to leave. I had no money. In the two or three weeks before coming into hospital I had got to the point of picking up cigarette butts off the pavement outside bars. I had spent everything I had. I remember at one point becoming convinced that I was being followed by special-forces agents and going into a Knightsbridge clothes shop to buy new clothes and bin the ones I had been wearing. Irresponsible spending is, for me, a major warning sign that I may be heading toward a bipolar episode or that I am ‘going high’. Anyway, back to the story. I was furious. I swore at the nursing staff. I wanted to go and do the interview and play on the radio station. This part was not in my head. They were expecting me. My classical music ensemble, the Santiago Quartet’s first album had gone well and started to sell and I got ill just at the wrong time, leaving a lot of wreckage around me, again! I had become obsessed with making a second album before anything had been planned and nobody knew what was going to be on it, not even me. I almost forgot that I was a father. I was in a psychiatric hospital convinced that I was in the process of making an album and that the consulting room was a recording studio. On other occasions I thought that I was Donnie Brasco from a movie that I had become obsessed with.

Then I would take a big dose of medication and get involved in the merry-go-round of a day under section; lots of walking around in circles trying to get cigarettes, lots of trying to keep hold of my own cigarettes, lots of lies and blaming staff. Tears, people screaming at me, swearing at me. We were all so unwell and had been removed from society. We needed to be and I couldn’t believe it had happened to me again. Fear, anger, bewilderment, rage, self-pity, self-loathing. I was full of all of them. The other patients had lots of conspiracy theories. I lived for six weeks in a tragically under-staffed, extremely unhealthy environment with a major shortage of compassion. The guy who came over from Austria to play on the radio show turned out to be one of the kindest, most genuine and talented musicians that I have ever met. He ended up coming and jamming with me in a consulting room on the lockdown ward. My Mum has since described him as an angel of light in an extremely dark time. People react to you in very different ways when they know that you are living with or have lived with mental illness. Some just want to deny it and talk about anything else. This is probably because they are uncomfortable and don’t know what to say. Some are cruel and make fun of you and talk about you behind your back. But the majority of people are compassionate and want to help. This guy did what he knows. He came to see me, got his guitar out and we played some music. I played the cello quite a lot in hospital and have done on the other three occasions that I have been admitted. Music has always been curative for me, an escape from my own head and, as a youngster, from social awkwardness.

A lot can happen in a year. This time last year I was looking forward to celebrating my 40th birthday, fully aware that I had some inner turmoil but as yet it didn't have a name. I suffered with bouts of feeling incredibly low; a despairing sort of low that I could neither explain, nor have the ability to think myself out of. At its worst I couldn't even summon the energy to get out of bed, but just lie there in an inconsolable grief of introversion.

At other times I had a head full of ideas, I was buzzing with life and a feeling of invincibility, I felt people should listen to what I was saying and I would get easily irritated and frustrated if they didn’t. It had been obvious for some time that my mental state was fragile, I had trouble sleeping, I was at times irrational and becoming increasingly paranoid and skittish with my behaviour. Without me realising it at the time, this was also having a devastating effect on my family life. My mood swings could cast a shadow over the whole house and test the equilibrium of family life and relationships. The toughest step of any problem is confronting it. And after a long period of procrastination I eventually saw a doctor, who in turn referred me to a consultant psychiatrist. It was at this point the word 'bipolar' was first used.

Bipolar, I'd heard of it but wasn't familiar with it. Bipolar is a mood disorder that manifests itself with bouts of mania and depression. With this diagnosis, I had a strong feeling of things starting to make sense and almost straight away I felt like a weight had been lifted off me. I'd been suffering with bipolar quietly for years without knowing it and suddenly it had a name. It gave me some comfort that other people felt similar to me, and with the help of medication it could be managed. I started medication last April to stabilise my bipolar and the impact it has had is very positive, it is not an illness that can be overcome but I am now getting towards some sense of normality. Medication, alongside knowledge and a strong base of family and friends means that I am enjoying life again.

It’s not always easy, I still have difficult spells from time-to-time, but as my forty-first birthday fast approaches, I am looking forward with a renewed sense of purpose. I made the decision early on that I would be honest about my illness; I wanted to talk openly to family and friends about my bipolar and how I feel. The response I’ve had has been nothing but supportive, and I also find talking about it really helps. I don’t want bipolar to define me, but it is a part of me that’s always been there. I am still the same person inside and with the help of medication I can now manage the extremes, which is helping me live a more balanced and productive life. So, why am I writing this and why should anyone care? Two reasons: Its cathartic and sometimes easier to write it down than to say it. Mental health issues will effect 1 in 4 people this year and the more people are open about these issues the lesser the stigma becomes. Mental health issues are difficult to talk about, public figures such as Stephen Fry, Alistair Campbell and Ruby Wax have all talked publicly about their problems and it shouldn't stop there. If public figures can share their experiences it lessens the stigma, if the general public can talk openly about it, eventually there will be no stigma. A lot can happen in a year.

This is about my sixth attempt to write this blog. I don’t always find it easy to open up and admit when I’m finding things difficult, and for me there’s something about running that makes it even harder. This isn’t a blog about how I took up running and it really helped my mental health. This is a blog about how I’ve found running and training for races quite difficult mentally at times. Although I love many aspects of running, it also brings out my capacity for guilt and self-criticism. There can be quite a lot of “no excuses” and “man up” type messages in the running world and I really struggle to keep these in perspective at times, especially when my mood is low. All through school I hated running. I was rubbish at it. Really properly nearly-always-last rubbish. But, in my mid-twenties, I decided I’d give it a go as an adult to see if I could come to enjoy it, even a tiny bit. You know those runners you see in the street, the ones who look like they’re having a not unpleasant time? I wanted to know what that was all about. I decided to sign up for a 10k. Most of my early runs were a massive slog, but then one day, I was running and I suddenly realised it felt good. Running and feeling good – both at the same time! Running the 10k was amazing – it was something I never thought I’d do. I felt so proud of myself. After the 10k, injury stopped me running for a while and I struggled to get back in to it. Over the years, there were various reasons for this - one was my mental health. During periods of depression my motivation and confidence were low. When I was eventually diagnosed with bipolar disorder, the medication I took massively zapped my energy, and the weight I put on as a side effect knocked my confidence. Two years ago, I decided it was time to try again so I signed up for The Royal Parks Half Marathon 2013. Not long after signing up, before I’d really started training, I sank into a severe depression. I don’t know why – my bipolar episodes usually come on without any apparent trigger. Depression usually comes with low energy and motivation – I couldn’t have felt less like running, but somehow I forced myself. Some days I’d put on my trainers and head out with tears streaming down my face. Those runs usually made me feel a bit better in the immediate aftermath, but they couldn’t lift me out of the abyss. I was signed off work – I ended up off for four months. I was struggling with suicidal thoughts most days. I was really quite unwell. Then my psychiatrist changed my medication. I began taking lithium and it really worked for me. I started feeling better pretty quickly. But the lithium complicated matters in terms of the running. I was advised to be careful about how much I exercised, particularly in the heat. With lithium, water intake and salt levels need to be kept steady, otherwise it won’t work as effectively, and it can even become toxic. Although I kept on running, I decided the half marathon was a bit much for me then. I was nervous about the medication. I wanted to focus on getting the lithium to the right level, on getting better and on getting back to work. I also didn’t feel I was well enough to cope emotionally with running in front of thousands of people, including many of my colleagues who I knew would be along the route. I told a runner I knew that I’d decided to pull out. “Those are just excuses”, he said. Those words really stuck with me. And “no excuses” is a message I’ve seen a few times since. I was well enough to go back to work soon after. I settled on a relatively low dose of lithium and I felt I’d be able to run safely on this, so the next year I signed up again - for the Royal Parks Half Marathon 2014. Training wasn’t easy. Lithium can make me very tired – I need more sleep and I’m pretty useless in the mornings so running before work isn’t really an option. Often, I’d come back from work feeling zonked too. During the first 10 weeks of my training plan I moved flats, twice. With a lot of time spent looking at potential flats as well as packing and moving, I didn’t always manage the four runs a week in my training plan. I felt guilty. “No excuses” was ringing in my head all the time. Despite this, I was fairly on track up until week 10 – then I got a cold. No big deal, but then I got a cough, and when I get a cough they usually become chesty and last for several weeks. I rested at first hoping it might go away, but it didn’t. Around this time my mood, which had been stable for nearly a year, dropped. I started to feel incredibly guilty and self-critical about my decisions. I’d tried taking time off so I’d be fit for the race but I wasn’t any better – I’d just ended up missing loads of training. I found myself crying to a colleague that I must just have a bad attitude to have a cough for so long, and asking why I had missed so much training – was this just an excuse? Lithium can also affect my stomach and this flared up in the fortnight before the run – I felt so nauseous I barely ate. Mentally and physically, I felt like an absolute wreck. The one aspect of my race preparation which had gone well was my fundraising. I was really overwhelmed by the generosity of my friends and family and felt so supported. But I also started to worry I was letting them down. I was never going to get what most runners would consider a good time, but I wanted to get a good time for me. But realistically, there wasn’t any chance of getting the time I’d initially set my sights on – I was underprepared and still pretty under the weather. The good news is I did the half marathon. I didn’t want to miss it again and I felt that running it was the right thing for me. I spluttered and coughed all the way round and I had a stitch from mile three right up to the finish line. I’d prepared mentally for it being difficult, but actually, I really enjoyed it. The atmosphere, and my friends, family and colleagues carried me along. I loved being part of team Mind and was really proud of my fundraising. Crossing the finish line was wonderful, but my favourite part was getting a hug from my god-daughter at mile seven. I haven’t been able to run much since then because I pulled a muscle in my calf shortly afterwards and it doesn’t seem to want to heal. Again, this has been a bit trying for me mentally. It’s been difficult working out whether I should try running on it or resting. When I’ve tried running on it, I’ve injured it again and set myself back to square one. Either way, again, I’ve often struggled with feelings of guilt and self-criticism. A month ago, my mood started rapid cycling – changing from depression to hypomania about every week. I’m really missing not being able to run at the moment – I think it would clear my head a lot during the depressed weeks and provide an outlet for the hypomania. During one of the low weeks, I ended up crying to my doctor about not being able to run – looking at this positively, I never thought I’d be the sort of person to cry about not being able to run! I’ve set my sights on more running. I have a place in the Great North Run in September and I’m hoping I might be ready to do the London Marathon for Mind in 2016. I have lots of work to do physically for these, but just as much mentally. In my job at Mind, I find myself telling people quite a lot to ‘be kind to yourself’. In my running, I really need to work out how to do this alongside having “no excuses”. I think both these messages have their place – I understand the “no excuses” thing and I really want to push myself but I need to learn to keep this in perspective and to make it work for me, to manage the guilt and self-criticism and to know when to give myself a break. Hopefully then, running will start to be good for my mental health.

I was diagnosed with bipolar disorder type 2 about three years ago in my late twenties. My psychiatrists held off with this diagnosis for a couple of years - they explained to me, bipolar disorder is not a diagnosis they rush into, particularly as treatment usually involves medication that comes with serious side effects. When I was told I might have bipolar disorder, in some ways, it was a relief. It felt like an explanation for the way I sometimes felt and behaved. It helped me make sense of this to an extent and gave me a starting point to find out more and read about the experiences of other people with this diagnosis. But it also meant accepting that I had it for life, which was not a relief. The prevailing medical opinion is that bipolar disorder is a chronic condition caused to a significant degree by underlying biological factors (although these aren’t yet understood). Accepting this meant I might be taking medication for life. When I first read the list of side effects of the medication I’d be taking, my first impulse was to flush it down the toilet. It was scary stuff. But I took it and I feel that medication has really helped me over the years. I watched Channel 4’s 'Being Bipolar' on Wednesday night with some trepidation. Generally I find programmes about mental health quite hard to watch because it can be triggering to watch other people in distress. I also feel quite nervous when I see programmes like this advertised because it’s really important to me that mental health issues are portrayed accurately on television, and frequently they aren’t. It’s hard enough having an illness that many people don’t understand without having it misrepresented on national television. Since my first hypomanic episode, I’ve always been interested in the causes of bipolar disorder. What happened to me felt so unreal and beyond my control. As Sian in ‘Being Bipolar’ also described, it felt like someone flicked a switch in my head. I went from feeling extremely anxious to feeling on-top-of the world, excited, hyperactive, invincible. When my mood changes, it happens for no reason that I’m aware of. When it does, the way my mind works becomes very different. When I’m depressed I don’t feel like myself – I’m very far from my normal way of being and thinking. When I’m hypomanic, I feel like a heightened version of myself. My mood changes often feel very physical. When I start to feel hypomanic, my brain feels like its fizzing. When I’m depressed, my brain and the rest of my body feels dull and heavy. I’ve always wanted to understand more about why I feel like this. I also want to understand why I have to take the medication I do. I don’t feel that ‘Being Bipolar’ helped me at all in this understanding. ‘Being Bipolar’ was presented by Philippa Perry, who, as a psychotherapist, naturally has a bias towards environmental factors. I felt that the journey she undertook to understand the causes of bipolar disorder was rather insincere. As the programme progressed it became increasingly apparent that she had undertaken this journey with preconceived ideas and many things along the way seemed to be misinterpreted to fit a preconceived narrative. The whole area of biological factors was tackled in a very simplistic way, skimming over the surface of academic research in this area. Sian’s psychiatrist spoke of a “chemical imbalance” so Philippa met with Consultant Psychiatrist and academic Dr. Joanna Moncrieff to debunk this. Joanna Moncrieff is probably the most prominent anti-psychiatrist in the UK so this was hardly a neutral choice. Joanna told viewers there is "no evidence that bipolar disorder is caused by a chemical balance" and there is "not even an agreement about what chemical may be involved in bipolar disorder".  I felt this was not a particularly useful route to go down. “Chemical imbalance” is simplistic and not really the prevailing theory. Current research, which is in its infancy, has found evidence of biological factors in several different areas: nerve endings, endocrine systems; neurotransmitters; glutamate receptors; differences in grey and white matter; misregulation of calcium channels; and genes. It’s certainly true that there is no agreement about what chemical is involved, but the brain is a very complex organ – why should bipolar disorder come down to one chemical? In my view there is significant evidence that biology is a crucial factor in bipolar disorder and the programme ignored vast areas of research. Joanna then explained her views on medications used to treat bipolar disorder and Philippa concluded "although the drugs might provide some temporary relief, they don't actually cure anything", before telling viewers "that's a surprise to me". To me, the idea that Philipa was surprised by this is quite unbelievable. I don’t think my medication (lithium) cures my bipolar disorder. It helps with the symptoms. These medications are not targeted enough to be viewed as a ‘cure’ by scientists and doctors (and to present them in this way to patients would be misleading). But surely Philippa Perry, as a psychotherapist with an interest in this area, would have known this already? This statement was a strange distortion of current understanding and suggesting it was some sort of amazing revelation in the journey to understand bipolar disorder seemed very odd to me. The subject of medication for bipolar disorder, and for psychiatric illness in general, is far more complex than was presented in the programme. Next, Philippa met Professor of Neuroscience Ian Jones, who seemed far more of the medical-model persuasion, to talk about genetics. He explained that there was not "a gene" underlying bipolar disorder but many hundreds or thousands of different genes involved in increasing or decreasing the risk. That seems reasonable to me – genes are complicated, eh? Ian Jones states in no uncertain terms that bipolar disorder is not 100% environmental and there are genetic factors involved. Although Philippa accepts this 'reluctantly', she still seems to interpret this evidence as showing Sian is wrong for thinking only one gene was at fault. She also doesn’t seem to think this finding has any bearing on the issue at hand. It seems these genes are just hanging around in the background, not affecting any brain processes at all… Early on in the programme, Philippa has a “growing suspicion that the symptoms each person develops are a result of their life experiences”. To me this seems quite a wild conclusion based on having met just three people – not a very representative sample. Moreover, it goes against what these people have told her about their own experiences (for example, she seems to ignore their repeated assertions that they haven’t experienced childhood trauma). It also goes against the experiences of many thousands of other people, who have taken part in valid scientific research in this area. I'm not saying that life experience isn't a factor, but I don't believe it's the only factor as implied in the programme. Philippa’s view is that psychotherapy is the answer rather than medication. I've had Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) to help me deal with my mood swings, which was helpful. When my mood dips, CBT helps me to cope to some extent, but it doesn’t really help me get out of this state and it doesn't prevent the mood swings – that’s what my medication does. I’ve tried other, deeper psychotherapy but this didn’t last long because the therapist didn’t think there were any issues I needed to explore. That’s not to say, it won’t help some people, but this isn’t the simple solution presented in the programme. The conclusion to ‘Being Bipolar’ is that "Sian has a choice" and Philippa would like her to stop being "a slave to her emotions". I have a choice. I choose to take lithium. Before I started taking this I’d been off work for four months with severe depression. When I started taking it, it made me feel like my normal self, pretty much straight away. Not a lesser, dampened, sedated version of my normal self (although it does make me tired) - just normal, default-mode Laura. This is the thing that helps me not to be a slave to the emotions that take over my mind without warning every now and then. ‘Slave to her emotions’ is a very loaded term and the tone of the programme regarding medication seemed quite moralistic and paternalistic to me. With any mental illness the interaction between biological and environmental factors, and the direction of influence between these, is complex. Whatever the combination of these factors, if a person chooses to take medication, that is their choice, and it’s a valid choice. Likewise, if they choose not to. To me, ‘Being bipolar’ misrepresented bipolar disorder. It was unscientific and I believe disingenuous. With a more balanced exploration and with the three participants being more at the forefront of the story, it could have been so much better. Why does this matter so much? One of the reasons is that this type of misrepresentation can result in stigma and discrimination. I’m really lucky to work for a mental health charity where there is a lot of understanding of bipolar disorder and other mental illnesses – my manager is really understanding when I’m not feeling well. Could someone else’s manager have watched this programme and will now blame their employee for being a slave to their emotions? Many people are unable to work at all because of bipolar disorder – will they be stigmatised further than they already are? I really hope not.

Not everyone realises that some sufferers of Bipolar disorder also have psychotic symptoms. These could include delusions, auditory and visual hallucinations. For me, I hear voices. This happens during periods of extreme moods, so when I’m manic or severely depressed. During mania, the voices can be comforting. I have many ideas racing through my head during a manic phase, and the voices I hear add to the jumble. They give me ideas and fill me with confidence that then elevates my mood further. I often speak out loud to them and they reply very audibly, as if they were in the room with me. I remember instances when I’d been in my bedroom alone and I would run downstairs extremely excited, like I had just spoken to a friend on the telephone who I hadn’t seen for a while. I’ve had conversations with people where I’ve become distracted or ‘zoned out’ because there is a voice speaking to me. Sometimes I might make a joke that no one understands but me and the voices, or laughed out loud for seemingly no reason. The voices have become my friends and I think I would miss them if they were gone. If my mood becomes very elevated  I know they will be there and I look forward to hearing them. When I’m severely depressed I have heard screaming and shouting in my head. It’s often incoherent with a few words and sentences scattered about and all of it incredibly loud. The loudness of it all makes it an extremely intense experience, like being at the cinema with the sound booming all around you. Sometimes if feels directed at me and at other times the shouting feels intrusive, like somebody is ranting and raving at nothing or no one in particular. The worst part of this is not knowing how long it will go on for, and knowing I can’t escape it. It often happens when I’m in bed and can’t sleep, but it has happened during the day too. I’m sat or lying in the dark when the screaming starts. The screaming is constant and then there is a voice shouting “Everyone hates you,” “You’re worthless” and “Why don’t you kill yourself.” It frightens me immensely. I’ve found myself covering my ears to escape the noise. I’ve curled into a ball and cried on the floor or in bed as the screaming continues. Very occasionally, I hear tapping. It usually happens when I’m extremely irritable, which can happen when I’m depressed or manic. When I was younger I thought having someone who talked to me in my head was normal. I know people have conversations out loud to think through a problem, but the difference is they know exactly what the next sentence is going to be. As I’ve got older I’ve realised that my experiences are not the same. Now I find it embarrassing and I don’t like discussing it with anyone. I have been caught out a couple of times; I was on a train with my partner when I answered a question out loud. He said to me looking confused “Who are you talking to?” I remember turning red and saying “Oh sorry, I thought you asked me a question.” and left it at that. I also felt that if I told anyone about the screaming and shouting they would think I was disturbed and crazy. I’ve tried a few times to reach out to people but I can never seem to articulate exactly how it feels, or even to admit to the problem. I find writing and blogging to be therapeutic and it’s an easier way to explain how I feel. At the moment I am taking lamotrigine, an anticonvulsant, and aripiprazole, an antipsychotic. They have helped balance my moods, giving me stability. It’s not perfect, and I still have manic and depressed phases where I sometimes hear voices. I’m learning more about how to deal with these episodes, such as trying to rationalise what is happening and ignoring it when I feel able to.

Six years ago my life changed dramatically.  I was working towards one of my ambitions, to go to South America. I had booked to go on an overland tour during the summer holidays as I worked at a school. I was very passionate about my job. Looking back I think I was working too hard, work was taking over my life and I could not close my eyes at night without thinking about it. I recognised that I was becoming stressed and this built up so much that I could not sleep properly. I did not sleep for four nights. I can remember racing to my Mum and then to my sister and then to my friend. I was crying out for help but did not have the words to ask for it. It got to a point where I was becoming paranoid and had the most disturbing thoughts involving those closest to me. I was scared and frightened and started to become delusional. At this point, my friend took me to see my doctor. She prescribed me some sleeping tablets, but still I could not sleep. I was becoming manic; my thoughts were completely abnormal and I was starting to believe things that were not real. The following morning the crisis team came to visit me. My next memory was looking out of a window watching some rabbits in a hutch. I had no clue where I was, I knew no-one and my mind was racing. I eventually became so manic that I had to be pinned down by four people who stuck a needle in my bottom. The next few days were a complete haze. One thing I can remember is not being able to lift my head off the hospital bed and drooling like a boxer dog. Eventually, they found the medication that suited me and I got better over a period of time. I was told that I had been sectioned and my Mum and Dad also had to break the news to me that they had cancelled my trip to South America. I broke down, I had lost my dream. I returned home after three months. I had no life in me and felt totally deflated. I finally went back to work, but my confidence had been knocked sideways. I put on four stone due to my medication and battled every day to build my strength. I felt a different person and became very depressed. I pushed and pushed myself to become stronger and eventually bounced back after about two years. I lost the four stone that I had put on and was in such a good place that I decided to come off my medication... I had another manic episode and ended up back in hospital, sectioned again. This time, I stayed there for two months and went back on my medication. Eventually, after going through the same process as before, I went back to work and had to build my strength and confidence all over again. This time I put on five stone and became very unhappy. In November 2011 my parents insisted that I left my job and moved back home with them. I was diagnosed with bipolar. This was very difficult news to take in because I suddenly had a ‘label’. I had a mental health problem. I chose to disbelieve my diagnosis and challenged it at every opportunity. A year ago, I made the decision that I would try to come off my medication again. I wanted to be in control of myself. A few months later, I started to become aware that something was not right within me. My sleep was becoming erratic and I was becoming paranoid. This helped me to come to terms with the fact that I have bipolar and that there is nothing to be embarrassed about. I now take my medication every day. I may never be out of the woods, but I hope that by taking one tiny pill every day it will increase my chances of never visiting that dark place again.

Hi, I’m Becky, 16 years of age and have been diagnosed with bipolar 2 disorder. I was hospitalised for 9 months and have since been discharged. What I want to show is the way I use humour from my favourite comedies to combat the internal pain people with mental health problems can go through, even when it becomes completely unbearable. I’m now in the stage of recovery and because I have bipolar disorder, there are plenty of ups and downs. Sometimes I will wake up and realise things aren’t quite right but I’ll look in the mirror and say a really daft insult to myself out loud - and this allows me to just laugh, rather than ruminating and thinking it’s my fault that I don’t feel ok. It’s not. I know there are bad days, but I also know I can get through them. A little bit of sarcasm helps stop me from putting pressure on myself and remind me that the bad moments won’t last forever. Saying this sounds a lot easier than actually putting it into practice. It takes time, but as we all know, time is something we have to find a way of dealing with even when it can be excruciatingly long. When I feel that time is passing slowly, I like to keep in mind the comedy series ‘Black Books,’ whose main protagonist Bernard has a disdain for conventional living. In one episode, he’s on the phone to his mother and you watch him get really frustrated even though he’s only been on the phone for 11 seconds and subsequently hangs up! This, to me, epitomises the way time can be distorted when we are unwell. This doesn’t last forever though. We can laugh at ourselves, thinking of the absurdity of feeling we’ve been up for a week when it’s only been a few hours. One thing I have to watch out for is indecisiveness. I can never put my mind to one thing, I’m always moving about going from one thing to the other. Edina from ‘Absolutely Fabulous’ is a mother who is always wanting more from her life and can’t stop huffing and puffing about what to do. In one episode, she can’t even sleep normally and ends up ‘sleep jogging’. This reminds me of pacing around the living room, throwing books out to read but never actually deciding on anything. I laugh when I think about her and recognise our similarities. This helps to remind me that there are many others who have difficulty putting their mind to something. Having bipolar disorder, I have to be on a combination of medication, which leads to a few side effects such as tremors, blurred vision and a dry mouth. These can be frustrating, but my dad and I make light of these by putting my side effects in an imaginary dating profile. Some of the “attractive” qualities are as follows: have to chew chewing gum to keep my saliva producing; have to apply lip balm at least twenty times a day; and have bad vision so my date would have to wear bright colours! ‘What a catch!’ some might say sarcastically. But this displays the good self-esteem I have and helps me view myself in a positive manner. I can make fun of myself and still be happy with who I’ve become. I am not trying to say that mental health problems like bipolar disorder are hilarious – I would never try to do that. All that I’m saying is that seeing the lighter side has really helped me and they do say that laughter is the best medicine! There are many different forms of humour, and you just need to find one that keeps you optimistic.

Boxing Day, 2021. On the brink of drifting into the annual food-coma, my mind wandered and, reflecting upon the past few days, I realised something incredible: I had enjoyed myself. This was a revelation not due to any issues with hanging out with my family (promise, Mum), but because it had been years since I’d felt genuine joy and I had got to the point where I’d given up hope of ever being able to. In fact, I had pretty much given up altogether. It’s difficult to pinpoint exactly when my mental health began to deteriorate or assign a cause. Everybody’s depression is different – from root to manifestation – and I do count myself fortunate to have not suffered a significant trauma to trigger mine. Instead, my depression crept up on me slowly.

My mental health struggles were even more of a surprise to everybody around me. There are still so many preconceptions about what it “looks like” to have depression and I don’t fit the stereotype – I’m not constantly sighing, wearing black, or wandering around with an Eeyore-esque cloud above my head. In fact, if you met me during those years you’d have seen a bright, smiling woman who seemed to have life sorted. I was extremely good at hiding my depression from those around me. This was one of the most exhausting elements; the façade took so much energy I had nothing left for myself when I came home at the end of the day. This desire to appear “normal” and happy not only zapped my energy, but also made my depression worse. I would work so hard to join in with fun events with friends and family, only to come home feeling empty, knowing that I didn’t really enjoy any of it, feeling like a terrible person for not appreciating all the good that was in my life.

I tried various forms of therapy, was on medication, and followed other guidelines such as keeping active to try to beat the cloud that harangued me. But what I didn’t understand was that the core of my depression was a distinct lack of love for me. Without that, I was never going to be happy. Which brings me on to my challenge – and back to Boxing Day 2021. Having realised that there was still the potential to feel good, I decided I needed to give life one last go. I made a plan. After the terrible two years of the pandemic, I decided to dedicate the next 100 days (starting December 27th) to trying new things. It seemed a fitting way to begin to make up for lost time but I had no idea how transformative it would be. I started small: trying a Pot Noodle, doing a backwards roll, learning to shuffle a deck of cards. This was super important – I needed small, manageable firsts to get the ball rolling – and fit into my life, work obligations etc. I got a little thrill each time I could tick a new thing off my list. A simple task like cleaning a bath plug wasn’t going to drastically change the course of my life, but it gave me a tiny moment in my day where I could congratulate myself and feel a sense of achievement – and what’s more, it was an act my destructive brain couldn’t try to warp into a negative.

All my new things were pure and good in what was often an otherwise miserable day, and they shone for that reason. Within only a few weeks, I was waking up not just dreading the day ahead but looking forward to what new thing I would do within it. For the first time in years, I had hope. Hope that life could be good; hope that maybe I had a future after all. Once ignited, this inner light shone brighter and brighter. I began to have pride in myself, in the little things I was achieving daily. For the first time in forever, I felt I had something to offer – both to myself and to others. I began to like myself. And from this I started to look forward to speaking with people. I felt I suddenly had something to say, like I wasn’t just a waste of air. Being around other people became less exhausting, because my smiles and laughter were no longer a charade. As the challenge went on, my new things evolved and became more adventurous. I went on several solo trips (something I never thought I’d do), tried activities such as surfing and ballroom dancing lessons, and I even flew a plane! This was another transformative side-effect – I have become so much more open to new experiences. Life – and the world – is fully open to me now because I in turn am open to embracing it. When I’m asked what my favourite activity was, I reply that it’s this new-found sense of adventure, and ability to be independent, that has been the best outcome. Although my challenge has long finished, I continue to look around me for new things I can try. Big or small, whether I enjoy it or not, the important part is celebrating the newness of it.

While I have predominantly overcome my depression, I am fully aware that I’m not “fixed” and that this is a facet of my life I will always need to work on. Indeed, last weekend I had to shut myself away for a day because I didn’t feel capable of seeing or speaking to anybody. This was unsettling, as I felt I was going “backwards”. But the confidence I’ve built up over the past year or so has given me the foundations to bounce back. I know I can feel happiness, I know how strong I can be, and I have a year of memories to give me the energy to accept low moods and to start again afresh the next day when they happen. To anyone reading this – especially those feeling lost like I was – give the challenge a go. Even if you don’t experience the transformation that I did, at worst you’re going to be able to look back and reflect on having achieved 100 (or whatever target you decide upon) new things that you hadn’t experienced before. Which is still pretty cool, right?

I was driving to a meeting when my heart started racing. I couldn’t breathe properly. I felt I wasn’t safe. I was experiencing the symptoms of a panic attack. Somehow, I manged to get to a service station where I parked up and burst into tears. I felt that I couldn’t call my wife or parents as I didn’t want to worry them. It was then I remembered that Mind had a helpline, so I did a quick a search on my phone for it and called that instead.

The first thing they did was get me to address my breathing as I was crying and struggling to breathe. They were so calm and gentle, and they reminded me that this was a panic attack and that I was safer than I thought. They talked to me for about 15 minutes until I felt ready to carry on. They also told me about the Mind website and a local Mind group where I could get support. The thing that struck me was just how reassuring and patient they were with me particularly as I probably wasn't making much sense because I was so scared.

I didn’t immediately engage with Mind, and my depression got an awful lot worse. I went to see my GP who put me on antidepressants and arranged some counselling, but I was still experiencing cycles of anxiety and depression. It was when I was watching the London Marathon on TV that an old ambition stirred in me. I’d always wanted to run the marathon, but I’d got quite unfit in my 30s. I applied to Mind for a charity place. I knew I wanted to run for Mind because that first call to the Infoline helped me at one of my lowest points.

I ran the London Marathon for Mind in 2017, and that was life changing for me. It gave me so much confidence. I’d achieved something that was a massive challenge and had found something that made a big difference to my mental health. Running got me outside and gave me goals and objectives. As well as being active, running helped me live in the moment, instead of worrying about the future or past, which I’d always done. I’ve now run seven marathons and raised several thousand pounds for Mind.

Ten years on from that panic attack I still use the Mind website regularly. The personal stories highlighting how other people have struggled with similar situations and thoughts help me deal with feelings of shame and stigma. They show me that I’m not alone. My journey with Mind started with that first call to the Infoline, but it has grown stronger ever since. Looking back, there were moments when I should have called the Infoline before, but I was scared of being judged. I’ve never felt any judgement from Mind – only support and care. For anyone wondering if they should call, just do it.”

It’s not easy to be vulnerable in a society that demands men to be tough. Like many others I opted to suffer with my difficulties in silence. We believe that by showing no sign of weakness we are stronger. I have been suffering with depression since 2015. After a difficult year keeping what I had away from others, I had no choice but to reach out for help. I sought help from my doctors and was diagnosed with anxiety and depression. Following a moment of epiphany in October 2017, the 17th to be exact, I have strived to make sure that everything I did was for the benefit of my mental health. Despite my reluctance to do so, being vulnerable was to be the most important part of my journey.

The diagnosis from a GP had confirmed what I already knew, nevertheless it was needed. I told a few of the people closest to me, which was so tough. It’s ironic really – the strength it takes to admit you need help. I don’t know how I ever considered it to be a weakness! Despite my moment of strength, I decided to bury my thoughts again, taking each day as it came, hoping that eventually I might get better. What held me back was I hadn’t taken ownership of my illness. I put so much of my recovery on external things like having more money. Which for me didn’t work. My situation got no better because I did not make changes to allow it to be so. That’s not to say my illness was my fault. But I was the one who was going to have to make it better. From this, my seven steps were born. I did some experimenting and found seven easy things that made me feel better. Of these seven, the most important was talking – something I needed to do more of. Although the people around me were aware of my struggles, I very rarely spoke about them. The more I started to do this, the better I felt. A problem shared is a problem halved. It wasn’t even necessary for the people to have the answers, it just made me feel a lot better to get things off my chest. The more I shared, the more people then became open with me. Especially my male friends. It turns out more of us had been keeping things to ourselves. We were just one group of friends, too. I thought about all the possible groups of males that did not talk about their difficulties together. It can’t have been just us. After looking into the stats, it surprised me how many people struggle.

According to the World Health Organization, one in four people in the world will be affected by mental health problems or neurological disorders at some point in their lives. Meanwhile, men accounted for around three-quarters of UK deaths by suicide in 2018. So why aren’t men talking about how they are feeling? In 2016, a survey for Men’s Health Week found that amongst men who had experienced mental problems, 46% would be embarrassed or ashamed to tell their employer and 52% would be concerned about taking time off. What surprised me most was that something so common is so infrequently spoken about amongst men.

I had come a long way from the guy who buried his thoughts. After receiving a lot of help myself, it was time for me to be the helper. Which is why in 2019 I decided to start sharing about my difficulties on social media. The main purpose was to encourage men to talk more. I’d like to think that if people could see me become vulnerable and share about my difficult times, they may be encouraged to do the same. I like to share different things I do to keep myself feeling good. Whether it’s the food I’m eating, books I’m reading, the podcasts I’m listening to. If it’s positive, I get it out there. I eventually began to share some of my writing, a hobby that I had found to be really helpful, starting with my first blog, My Seven Steps.

What’s even better is I’m not the only one. There’s a whole community of people devoted to helping improve people’s mental health. We learn from each other and that is brilliant. I’ve made some amazing friends through my Instagram. Since starting my page I’ve published four blogs and created a website to share my work. Every one of us has mental health, whether it is considered to be in a good place or not. I could never have imagined myself in this position four years ago and it all started through talking. This is why I want people to do the same. I’ve witnessed the power it has given me, I hope that it can do the same for others.

For as long as I can remember I have experienced mental health problems. Throughout my teenage years particularly I experienced periods of manic happiness, including excessive socialising and spending, followed by periods of intense depression, including staying in bed all day and cancelling plans with friends. As a teenager my dramatic mood swings manifested in hysterical tears, aggression and violence. I started drinking alcohol at 13 years old. Imagine suburban house parties with no parental supervision and too much alcohol. Girls in very little clothing, stumbling around the ground floor of a complete stranger’s five-bedroom Surrey mansion. I repeated this pattern every weekend until I left for university. I used alcohol to help with confidence and self-esteem.

During the latter part of my teenage years I had suicidal thoughts, where I just didn’t want to be here anymore. I have self-harmed in the past to deal with emotions when I’ve been unable to articulate them to friends and family. When I left for university I was a wreck. My mental health was at an all-time low, and I was struggling. I had thought of deferring my place at university in order to “sort myself out”. However, in my mind, I thought running away to university and a fresh start, would be the answer to my heavy drinking, self-harm, depression and anxiety. I was wrong. I was painfully homesick at university. I continued drinking to excess, becoming the butt of everyone’s jokes. I didn’t stay in touch with friends or family. I shut myself off, placing myself in an emotionally vulnerable position. I felt so isolated.

In my early 20s I experienced a series of life-changing events. My parents divorced unexpectedly which shook me to my core. That year I started my career as a teacher. During this time I was extremely depressed. The relationship I had with my parents was strained, at a time when I really needed them both. The following year my best friend died suddenly from a brain aneurism. I drank alcohol excessively to cope with my pain.

My teaching career went from strength to strength. I love my job! However, it is not a walk in the park. There is a big social culture in schools. After a long week of teaching, we all used to flock to the “library”, to enjoy a glass of wine, or in my case a few bottles. Soon Friday drinks turned into every-night-of-the-week drinks. I felt anxious and stressed all the time.

By the end of 2019 my mental health was at rock bottom. I was depressed and felt overwhelmed with anxiety and crippling stress. These feelings were particularly pronounced after drinking, but they were becoming routine. I was drinking three bottles of wine a night to deal with my feelings of isolation, depression, stress and anxiety. I felt completely broken, and I couldn’t see a way out. I told myself I wasn’t good enough or that I was failing in my professional life, and that I’d never move out of my family home. I felt like my life had zero direction, and I just wanted to give up on life. But instead, I gave up on booze. The first six months were challenging. I was very lonely at times. I was frustrated by how much people’s lives seemed to revolve around alcohol. People didn’t necessarily understand why I had given up drinking saying things like “Just have one” or “Why can’t you just moderate?” People often describe alcoholism as a lonely disease, but, sobriety made me feel more alone than ever. No one could relate to what I was going through. I persevered and after about nine months could see the benefits clearly. My boss and colleagues have told me I am like a “different girl”. I’ve paid off all debts, and have finally bought my first property. My mental health has vastly improved. Since giving up drinking I have dealt with death, cancer and like everyone, the global pandemic. I didn’t turn to wine, as I would do usually. I have had a clear mind to tackle all these challenges head on. Sobriety isn’t a magic wand designed to solve all your mental health problems, and I appreciate lots of people can drink moderately. However, sobriety has allowed me to tackle a lot of deep-rooted issues, I was burying with alcohol. Sobriety, in conjunction with weekly counselling, has restored my faith in myself. I trust myself now, which I never thought I would be able to say. 

“My lungs want to live but my brain wants to die”. I wrote these words in a journal in 2019, the year I had to fight for my life. Because I was battling severe depression and suicidal urges. It was a fight I did not think I would win, but I did - I survived, and being a member of Mind helped me in that battle for survival.

My brain is an organ like any other. When it gives up, the body can’t live then either. There was no miraculous change when things got better, but eventually I stopped thinking about dying every day and some will in me was gradually rekindled. I’m afraid every day of it coming back, because depression has come for me before. There are parts of my brain that would force me to wallow in this – parts that if I listened to, I would never get up again. But there are other parts that want to fight, and part of fighting for me is speaking up and using my words to make a difference. At the end of 2019, trying to find something to bring me back from the brink, I decided to get involved in the work of Mind. I signed up to volunteer for my local Mind and I joined Mind’s membership. I didn’t know why I needed to do it, I just did. It was something with no end goal; no further purpose than this is something I want to do, so I’ll do it. In helping Mind, I realised things about myself that I had lost. Things that I had always known but had forgotten in the depths of mental ill health. I had power. I am a person. I can share my experiences. I can write. So I sat down and I wrote. And the crazy thing was people cared about what I wrote. They related to it, they learnt something, or it reached something in them. It was also doing the very opposite of what my brain, my depression, told me to do: hide away, withdraw, and never mention what goes on in your head. Speaking up gave me power over my depression.

So when thinking about recovery I realised that being yourself in this world is the bravest thing to do. We might share similarities, there might be things that we all find helpful, but in the detail that’s all you. 

When you’re mentally unwell and people suggest things like the “five ways to wellbeing” the key is how you tailor it to your needs. A standardised five ways to wellbeing probably won’t work, but if you adapt it to who you are, what you like and your needs it just might make a difference. Your five ways to wellbeing will be different to mine, but here are some things to think about when finding your own way of building the ways to wellbeing into your life. Expressing yourself comes in so many different forms; don’t limit it by thinking you’re not creative. Giving is different too - make sure it’s something that you believe in, something you know is right for you, not something you think you ought to do. Being active can feel like a pressure – for example being told running is good for you. It shouldn’t feel like a pressure though. Being active can be any form you like; it can be dancing around at home - it is. put simply. using that body of yours anyway you like. Keep learning. This for me has been key. Learning is a part of having purpose. That is what bad mental health can take from you. Again, don’t get defined by school or work. Just ask yourself what do I want to know more about, what have I always wanted to learn? Finally reach out to people – but find the right balance, there are times when I cannot face talking to someone on the phone, so I’ll text instead. Be kind to yourself, match where you are and make compromises. With all of these ways to wellbeing the most important approach to take is to problem-solve. If you don’t want to do something one way, try coming up with something more manageable.

Being a Mind member gave me a positive place to channel some of the frustration I felt at the mental health system, and a place to make sense of some of the journey I had been through. I want things to change. I want more support for people struggling, I want fewer waiting lists, and better trained professionals. I want to feel like I don’t have to exaggerate symptoms just to get help, or to have to explain some of the worst of my experiences to people who don’t understood or in some instances even care. All this has to change, and Mind helps me be a part of that battle for myself and for others. I have always got a lot from reading about others’ experiences and being able to share my own in the Mind Membership News magazine. I think that a big part of change is speaking out. Voicing our experiences is so powerful. Mind has always felt like it puts the lived experience first and recognises that we know the most about what mental ill health is like and the kind of support there needs to be out there. I can’t tell you how invaluable that is. Being a Mind member means being part of a legacy of change. It means learning from others and ourselves. Getting help was not easy. Negotiating the mental health system when you are extremely unwell is almost impossible without people fighting in your corner. This needs to change. I want to be part of the change and with Mind I feel I can.

I picked up my first drug at the age of 13. From then on, things just went out of control. When I was using, I didn’t have to be me. I could put on a persona or a mask; I could be a totally different person. I didn’t have to be the lad who was being bullied or having a tough time. My family didn’t have a clue. I was manipulative and I was good at lying; I hid it really well. I can’t remember a day where I didn’t use back then. But if I wasn’t using, I couldn’t sit still. I couldn’t be me. I didn’t want to be. The drugs numbed everything. So instead, I hung around with people who were using or people who had money to buy me drugs. And I got high. It all came crashing down in 2015. I had been heavily using for two weeks straight and I’d hit rock bottom. I just didn’t know where to turn. I ended up trying to take take my own life. I failed (fortunately) and rang my ex-partner. She is the mother of my daughter - who was just a baby then – and she told my family. My Mum came to pick me up and took me to the doctors. He signed me off work and gave me medication. But I did get some more help because my Mum knew of CAIS – Champions House – in Wrexham which supports people with drug and alcohol addiction. It is free to attend and I was given some bus passes to help with travel costs because I was totally broke. CAIS is like a club for addicts and it keeps you busy with lots of different activities. I went to Narcotics Anonymous too but it wasn’t really for me.

After I’d got clean and started going to CAIS, my partner at the time kicked me out. I didn’t really have anywhere to go and I had no money so I was sofa surfing for a while. And I started using again. I was getting benefits but I’d have to spend most of it to sleep on someone’s sofa. That left me with £20 a week for food which I ended up spending on weed. I have jumped on and off the rails a few times. But it was at CAIS I picked up a leaflet for Wrexham Inclusion Football Club. It is a club for people with mental health problems and disabilities. And just a couple of days later, I went along. That was the real turning point in my recovery. The club has transformed me. It saved my life. I’ve been clean now for 14 months. I often say that football is my new drug. I had always loved it as a kid and I stopped playing when I started using. In my recovery I had tried other clubs, but I really fitted in here, They understood me and I felt confident. But they also didn’t pander to me and let me get away with behaving badly. Over the years, I have been really angry but the club teach you to manage your emotions. In the past, I’ve mouthed off at coaches and they’ve taken game-time away. We went to the European Championships in Munich and they banned me from playing in the first match because of the way I’d behaved in training. It was what I needed. I would describe everyone at the club as family. I could phone the coaches at 3am and they’d sit and listen to any troubles I‘ve got. They have given me opportunities that other clubs wouldn’t. They’ve paid for me to get my coaching qualifications and I’m now even running my own football sessions. It’s not something I would have thought possible a few years ago. Every Wednesday, they have an open-door policy where we can come in for group work on subjects like anger management or debt management. We can also get one-to-one support. Sometimes I feel my anger rising and I am ready to pop. I know that if someone tackles me in the wrong way, I’ll react badly. So I know I need a sit down to chat with the guys and then I’m ok and ready to play.

I know now that I was suffering with depression when I was using. And I still struggle on and off now. I attend counselling through the NHS which is helping, although I still find it hard to talk about my feelings. Coronavirus has been really hard because I haven’t been able to play football. It is a massive coping strategy for me so to have that taken away has been really difficult. But I stayed clean throughout and now training is restarting. I can’t wait. I know it’s always going to be hard. Every time something goes wrong in my life, I am tempted to use. But things in my life are so much better. When my Grandparents – who are quite old-fashioned – first found out about the drugs, they were shocked and cut off contact with me. But they understand addiction a little better now and they are supportive. I am seeing my young daughter again who means the world to me. I’m playing, I’m coaching and I’m dealing with things better and getting the support I need.

It’s like the dark and ugly beast of depression had crawled back into the very shadows of my mind. Lockdown was the weapon that was saving me. It starved my depression and anxiety because it had nothing to feed off. But now that lockdown has lifted in my county, a part of me wants to return to it. I think about how selfish it must be to crave lockdown and isolation when so many people across the country are suffering and begging for their own to be lifted. But then I wonder, how can it be selfish to want to be content instead of fighting back the sting of tears that constantly threaten to spill? Before the lockdown, I struggled with the pressures of life. I would look on social media and compare myself to other people and ask myself; why are they doing better than me? Why do they have a better job? If people my age are getting engaged and announcing pregnancies, am I unlovable? I discussed these anxieties with my therapist, but I still felt worthless and pointless. I would sit in my room doing nothing but watching Netflix because it was the one thing that helped me to escape from the real world that was so dark, twisted and ugly. But now I find myself slipping back into that same routine. I go to a job that I find unfulfilling and tedious, I look on social media and wonder why I haven’t  been able to achieve as much as everyone else, and then I turn to Netflix for comfort and escapism.

When lockdown fell like a curtain over all our lives, I felt like everyone was finally in the same situation as the one I always find myself in. I would watch as my sisters socialised and went out with their partners and the only true outings I would get was the few days work that was tossed towards me like a bone and the couple of restaurant trips I would take with my friends. Sometimes, I don’t want to socialise at all. But when lockdown dropped everyone in the same situation of being unable to socialise and go out, I felt less pressure to live up to the expectations of social media. Social expectation feels like a heavy ball and chain around my ankle, and lockdown freed me from that chain for a few months.

The feelings that I was useless, unwanted, ugly; became whispers rather than screams. Lockdown gave me the opportunity to write the story I had always wanted to write, to binge even more TV shows that had wormed their way onto my growing list and to take daily walks in the afternoon sun with my family. It had felt like an escapism within an escapism because people were sharing it with me. I felt like I was at one with them because whether they knew it or not, no matter how briefly, they understood me and had experienced a snippet of my lifestyle. But now that lockdown has lifted, I feel like I’m being slowly pushed back into my cage by the beast. Since the end of lockdown, I have stopped writing the story I was working on, and although I’ve been out with a couple of my friends; its been a struggle to do so. I just feel so deflated and unmotivated compared to the creativity and freedom that lockdown gifted me with. I am trying to take each day as it comes by continuing with my weekly CBT, and engaging in activity monitoring, along with scribbling down any NATs – negative automatic thoughts – that I may have. I just hope that I will eventually be able to unlock the cage for myself.

I had been working in advertising for over 20 years. Eighty-hour weeks had taken their toll – I lived alone in London and would get home at nine or ten at night ready for nothing more challenging than a ready meal for one.  Although I had money I had no relationship, no life, and no joy. I came home and cried every night. The final straw was having to cover someone else’s accounts while they were on leave. That was when I went to see my doctor. I was diagnosed with clinical depression. I told my boss I needed some time out and that I would be spending six months in India doing the only thing that worked for me – yoga.

It was the only place that I felt safe. I knew that as long as I travelled with my yoga mat I could envisage a future. That future might only stretch six foot in front of me, but it was a start. My lovely boss bought me a yoga mat and promised to keep my job open for me. The trip around India was life changing, but not in the way I had expected. I travelled north, south east and west, trying out every form of yoga and meeting lots of yogis along the way. While I had harboured secret hopes of becoming a yoga teacher, I became pretty disillusioned with the motivations of some of the yoga students I met along the way. There was a lot of obsession with the superficial – with using yoga to get a great body, as opposed to the deep spiritual enquiry I was expecting. I continued to feel lonely and isolated, not on the same page as everyone else and, to comfort myself, I spent a lot of time writing a diary. That diary became a safe space – a place to confide the way I was feeling and, as I read it back to myself I realised that if I wasn't on the same page as everyone else, and actually didn’t want to be on that page. I needed to turn to a new page. During my travels I’d noticed that for a lot of Indian people it turned out that Yoga was a part of everyday, a few exercises morning and evening combined with meditation and the giving of thanks to their Hindu gods. Whilst I am not religious, I took from this the importance of a gratitude practice, and the beauty of ritual – the lighting of a candle or the burning of incense to mark the giving of thanks. Whatever it looked like, the important thing was the discipline of a daily practice that created both time and place for gratitude, experiencing a sense of connection to something much bigger than myself, and acknowledging this wonderful gift called life. India had worked its magic and it was time to come home. I chose not to return to the ad agency, instead forging a new career for myself in the world of yoga. I had realised, along the way, that the thing that was most important to me, having experienced the transformative power of real yoga myself, was to help to publicise that transformative power. So I’ve written books about my yoga experiences in India (those diaries came in handy), and in my adopted home of Norfolk I’ve helped yoga teachers and yoga studios with their branding and copy so that the students they seek to serve can find them. I’ve also created an online platform for yogi makers – yogis inspired by their yoga practice to create sustainable yoga leggings out of plastic bottles, eco-friendly yoga mats, and mala jewellery that raises money for charity.

I consider myself blessed to lead this life, and now regard the depression I suffered as a gift. It has enabled me to leave the old behind and open up to a new way of being that enables me to be happy on any street, on any day. My advice to anyone suffering from depression is to try yoga. And you don't need to take my word for it. I’ve been collecting other people’s yoga stories for a couple of years now, and the common thread is the power of yoga to heal. I have also been collecting clinical studies on yoga for depression.

I wanted to fundraise for Mind because of the amazing work they do to help people deal with their mental health challenges, so I took an opportunity to put on a fund-raising event at the Serpentine Pavilion – the annual art installation at the Serpentine Galleries in Kensington Gardens. When the artist Junya Ishigami described his work as “a cave-like space for contemplation” he probably didn’t expect to be taken literally, but we did! Working with yoga teacher Zephyr Wildman we created the class as a celebration of yoga and meditation for stress and anxiety, dedicating it to those suffering from mental health issues, and those that love and care for them. Students came from near and far – one keen yogi traveling all the way from Dublin to join us. The class raised several hundred pounds for Mind, and a fundraising mala bracelet, traditionally designed to help heal and rebalance, is on sale now. You can purchase the Mind Mala Bracelet at YogaClicks (the ethical yoga shop) – all profits to Mind.

Where on earth did my depression come from? Frankly, who cares? I didn’t. When you’re in the mist of depression, where It came from or why is unimportant, the only thing that matters is to leave it behind. And that is far easier said than done. I had a happy upbringing in a family that cared for each other. I got on well in life, had loads of friends, had (and still have) a happy marriage with a great son, and a career where I was successful. I have always been healthy, being active in sport with many other interests such as photography, hiking, travelling and  gardening. That surely is a recipe for long-lasting happiness, right? It appears not. My depression came suddenly at the age of 50. I know what the trigger was, but I do not know the reason. For what it’s worth, my trigger was a fairly straightforward job change – promotion back into a previous company where I knew the people, the business and got on well with everyone. Depression is different for everybody. My experience was both a mental and physical implosion.

Desperation and despair. Fear and horror.  I ran away from everything. And avoided everybody. I knew it was irrational, but no amount of rationalising changed anything. I curled up on my bed and hoped for sleep or just blankness – any relief.  My mental turmoil was heightened by dreadful physical symptoms, I over-produced cortisol and, being a visual person, this somehow manifested itself in the sensation of poison slowly and relentlessly spreading through my chest. Awful. My wife was brilliant – empathetic and encouraging, sometimes arranging things I was obliged to participate in. I carried on with sport as best I could, keeping myself active and fit, though I lost weight. I used every bit of help I could find – my GP was great, I saw a psychiatrist and a psychologist, I did a course of CBT, I took medication and I regularly attended a Mindfulness programme. Did any of these help? I think all of these contributed, but actually, I look back on them as little more than props. They were not the reason I began to navigate my way forward. Perhaps I was lucky. I understood what was happening to me, I had researched the science, had a supportive family and great friends. I could try to concentrate on working things out. Depression is truly dreadful and many take the ultimate route out. I flirted with this, but alighted on a simple but effective way to ensure it never happened. I put a mental fork in my route ahead, a fork with a “do not pass” sign on one fork and a bend ensuring no visibility beyond. The other fork was my only way forward. I found other things that worked for me. A safe place is often talked about in CBT and Mindfulness. I found mine strangely in a painting! A huge beautiful countryside painting with a path leading into a golden wheat field, lovely trees and blue sky with fluffy clouds. Mentally I approached the painting to enjoy its scene and then kept on walking….into the scene. And I found sanctuary and peace.

Perhaps my key coping strategy was a simple mantra, a phrase that I mentally repeated on the darkest occasions. The phrase? ‘I just don’t care’. That was it, I just don’t care. Telling myself emphatically that nothing was important, I just don’t care, was my way of coping. Of course, I did care about so many things, but I had found my way of minimising the darkness and, together with all the external help, moving towards recovery.

I look back now and think of my experience as two years of sheer horror and three years of recovery. I have downgraded my career aspirations to concentrate on a job I know well and thoroughly enjoy, but I am recovered, full of life, passionate about my interests and always looking forward to new things. I’ve just turned 60, am fit and healthy and have absorbed myself during the Covid-19 lockdown not only with my job but also a project to raise funds for Mind. My project has been to produce a coffee-table large format photobook that I am selling with all profits going to Mind. I think I have spent about 150 hours on this project, have scoured the world for the best photobook print company, have gone through my entire catalogue of digital images and selected the best (in my opinion!), adding descriptive captions. I have managed to get the President of Mind, Stephen Fry, to sign a limited number of the books to sell at a higher price and raise more for Mind. A couple of English international rugby players have also agreed to sign the book (Maro Itoje being one) and I am trying other high-profile people. So if you fancy taking a look at my website, then you can see a full description of the project and all the images. You may even want to buy the book to raise funds for Mind.

This is new for me. I’ve spoken briefly about my own journey with depression and the general ups and downs of my mental health, but nothing in detail. So please, be gentle! 2015 was the first year that I’d felt low. Really low. So low that I couldn’t see a way out of it. For those who know me and spend time with me, this was a shock to them then, and still a shock to them now. My default disposition is a positive, happy, smiling, bouncing (I walk on my tip toes) ‘Tigger’ style caricature of a person. So, any reference to feeling low is not expected of me. There were many contributing factors to my mental health being poor at the time. In hindsight, I was far too busy; burning the candle at three ends and then chucking it on the fire for good measure! I was a dad of two young children in my mid-twenties, working a high-pressured full-time job that was out of my comfort zone, and then playing gigs sometimes three or four times a week. All in all, this left me massively in debt to my wellbeing.

For my 27th birthday my gift was a doctor's appointment booked, courtesy of my mother. They could see I was falling apart and needed help, which I will forever be thankful for. My initial consultation with the doctor was massively underwhelming. While I knew that SAD (Seasonal Affective Disorder) is a very real and valid condition, I didn’t identify with that diagnosis at all. On my second visit to the doctor, I was prescribed antidepressants and signed off work. Being the big strong man that I am, I didn’t collect my prescription and thought I could fight it myself, but eventually found out how wrong I was. A few weeks passed and without the hectic work and gigs to occupy my mind, I spiralled deeper and deeper into a depressive state. I could find no joy in playing with my children and would often snap and bark at them for no reason. I would leave the house at the slightest sign of stress, and could feel my grip on reality slipping further away. Thankfully, I was urged by my sister and mother to collect my prescription and start taking the medication prescribed. No doubt this saved me and my children from further heartache and misery. Though I initially experienced some ups and downs with the medication, I trusted the process and eventually began to feel the benefits. One such benefit was clarity that I needed to change other aspects of my life too. My diet was shocking, and I was lethargic because of it. I drank alcohol almost every evening, and even though in my mind it was ‘just one glass’ of wine or beer, I knew it was a habit I needed to kick. Having never been a big fan of exercise, the gym seemed like the last place I’d choose to go, but after some of my friends recommended a local gym, I decided to give it a chance. Daleon Gym in Merthyr Tydfil became a sanctuary for me as I literally transformed my life, while being supported and encouraged by the other members. I had a new lease of life! I’m very aware that a few interventions from people in my life saved me. I was (and still am) lucky to have such caring family and friends, who are always there if and when I need them. I always try and reciprocate: being a caring and supportive person is massively important to me. Since that dark time, I quit the high pressure job and found my calling: working in a college to help support young people with their mental health and wellbeing. My lifestyle changes – coupled with my medication, which keeps me on a level playing field – have helped me more than I could ever imagine.

I love my little family, my partner, and my two children who keep my days filled with love and laughter (and the occasional tantrum!). I still have days where it’s all too much, and have sometimes found myself feeling like a failure, but my support system has helped me time and time again. I guess the main thing I’ve learned is you have to give yourself a chance. Speak to medical professionals, get a medical opinion and move forward from there. I’m not too hard on myself when I do feel low and really put my faith in others. They will help in whichever way they can.

It's hard to stay focused on anything that isn't your own anxiety at a time like this. Every attempt to disengage or take a break from the all-consuming panic and anxiety of not knowing feels like a leap, but one that drops me even further. Some days are manageable. I fill my day by watching a film I've always wanted to watch, or reading a new book, or even just listening to music. Those are okay days – it's safe to say a good day isn't really a possibility at the moment. Living with depression and anxiety will, on the best of days, leave me with pains in my chest as I worry about what will happen if I go outside. So now? It feels like a minefield. Every night I've said, "I'll go for a walk tomorrow, clear my head", but then the day comes and I feel an onslaught of emotions – guilt for going out when we should be in, as well as for going out when I should be in work. Fear, over what I will see – what will I do if I see a group of four or five people together on my walk? The before constant fear of four or five people together, that they would laugh at me or look at me and confirm how I feel – nothing, a faux person in the shell of a t-shirt and leggings, with too much make up on for a half hour walk – has morphed to something new, alien. The new fear is that they aren't following guidelines, that they don't care what their actions may cause, and that they feel the same about me. It's a struggle to not want to rush the time spent on a walk. The calming aim of the walk to clear my head completely missed because I am power walking to avoid anyone, anything, and all the fears that come with it.

The essential shop each week is much the same. The anxieties of being out in public are multiplied, and I've found myself so angry at people for not following the procedures and the rules in place – when the man in front of me stopped abruptly to look at a tin of chickpeas, I swelled with rage, how dare he put my life at risk, so abruptly, so selfishly? I've left every shop near tears and trying my best to explain to my boyfriend how they just don't care about people and their safety. The anxiety has been magnified to new levels through something out of our hands. At the moment, my mental health is doing the opposite of what we are all doing. It's not on lockdown and isn't working quietly from home. It's bashing symbols and kicking down doors and wandering out freely. Granted, some days, it will sit quietly and only when the news comes on or the daily death figures are reported will it return, but other days it's constantly there. I wake up and worry, feel empty with the waste of the day in front of me, the routine of nothingness.

But I've been trying to combat this, day by day. I try to take deep breaths and remind myself I'm doing things as I should be, and that I'm following guidance. When I go for my walk, or do my essential shop, all I can do is remind myself that I'm doing the best I can.  At home, I try to manage my mental health on a day to day basis. While my boyfriend works from home, I try to plan my day with similar timings to his. I plan freely and don't set times for tasks, because that would be too much, but I tell myself each morning, "today, I will".  Such a small sentence, but so full of possibilities. "Today, I will put on clothes that make me happy, make me feel as free flowing as I want to be now." "Today, I will start that show I've always wanted to start and instead of feeling guilty about the time wasted." "Today, I will enjoy and revel in the amount of time I've spent in this new world." "Today, I will revisit music that I love, or find something new." "Today, I will sit in the garden and not get annoyed that the wind is blowing my hair across my eyes, but marvel that while the majority of us are sat still right now, the world is still moving, still there." "Today, I will apply for jobs, because maybe being sat at home is the best time to figure out my strengths." "Today, I will not beat myself up for not going outside, sometimes it just can't be helped." "Today, I will enjoy my coffee, and allow myself to laugh at the stupid jokes my boyfriend makes because he is trying to make me smile." "Today, I will not allow myself to feel guilty for other people, or for my choices, as I am making the best ones for me." "Today, I will not punish myself for something that is helping save lives." As we progress through this changing and scary time, I am trying to focus on each day, and what I can achieve in one day. It can be as simple and empowering as waking up in the morning, opening the curtains, washing my face, then going straight back to into bed to watch my favourite shows, read a new book or keep in touch with people online. Day by day is the only way I have found I can work through this period of our lives, through making choices for myself and following through on them. I hope today, you will also do this for yourselves.

I remember when I was thirteen years old and sitting at the end of my bed thinking 'What's wrong with me?', 'Why can't I just be normal?' When looking up the dictionary definition of 'Normal' it states, 'Normal is; standard; usual, typical, or expected'. When thinking about human beings those words have never come to mind because we aren't any of them. My name is Kate. I have battled with severe depression since a young age and am still fighting currently. After years of therapy, trying countless coping mechanisms and medication I am ready to share my story.

I have always needed reassurance in everything I do, from cooking a meal to completing a job; it always gave me some sort of purpose that I was doing my life right. Without that reassurance I often fell into a dark spiral where I felt I had no purpose in life. I had a dead-end job while my friends were either at university or getting married and seemed so certain about their futures. Social media made me feel like everyone else was doing great and that my life didn't matter in comparison. It was like a snowball effect in my mind, where one tiny thought would get carried away and I'd end up feeling completely lost and even wishing to end my own life, like turning off a light switch. While feeling hopeless and broken I would feel a physical pain in my chest and head where the pent-up anguish and toxic thoughts were becoming too overwhelming to handle. I had to express my emotions somehow. One day when I was feeling like this I picked up a scrap piece of paper and a pen and began to draw how I felt. Once I had finished, I put the pen down and cried silently alone in my room. The difference was that my chest felt eased and my thoughts had been muted.

After that episode I started to draw nearly every day, with every pen stroke acting like a release. Drawing out the negativity without hurting myself or those around me, the paper is my safe place and the pen is me venting my emotions how I feel is best. I found that sketching pulled me out of the darkness and gave me the confidence to discover who I was and how I really felt. I now specialise in continuous line drawing and animal sketching, which I am extremely passionate about. I have set up my own sketching page where people can view the art work and see my journey while I experiment with different styles, mediums and techniques.

In art there is no right or wrong, there is just perspective and personal interpretation, and this allows you to express yourself. I find sketching an escape from the world, a place where I can scribble and overlap lines the way I want to. It gives me control over my emotions and allows me to feel how I feel without judgement or anybody asking 'What's wrong with you today?' Whether it's music, dance, acting or scribbling on a post-it, art can help express the emotions that you didn't even realise you could describe. By sharing my story, I wanted to encourage the use of healthy and safe coping mechanisms where everyone can be their 'Normal' and not feel without purpose. We are all exceptional human beings who should take pride in being unusual and doing the unexpected. We have only one life; we owe it to ourselves to live it.

When I was growing up, I was diagnosed with social anxiety. I couldn't go out for a meal, couldn't go to the pub. I never used to eat anything before getting on a bus or in a car, because I'd feel sick. I remember once going to a pub and someone started talking to me, and I had to walk away. That can send the wrong messages to people. I knew when I joined the fire service, aged 26, that I needed to see a doctor to get something done about it. I knew I wouldn't be able to go to training school or sit in lecture theatres because I'd feel trapped. So I went to see a doctor, I had some counselling and medication and it cured me. But because of my anxiety I found it difficult to integrate myself with other people. I couldn't go out to the pub and socialise, so there was always "he's not one of us, he sits in a corner".

It was later on in my career, after I went through a divorce, that I started to suffer from depression. It's a very complicated thing. It's not about being sad – people said 'What have you got to be sad about?' – it's an imbalance of hormones in the brain. In the fire service, we are exposed to some tragic, horrible incidents. But you can keep on top of those situations. The ability to talk about a problem with someone makes a world of difference. It's amazing. Just talking about it can almost release some of it out of your body. And if you keep bottling it up it will come out in the end.

It can be life-destroying, because you can end up taking your problems out on other people. But talking about them and getting assistance can help. If you want to get help, there are so many organisations out there that can help. Occupational health have supported me 100% over the past four years, and my family has been fantastic. You have to find a person you can talk to. There needs to be someone available 24 hours a day in the workplace that someone like me can go to. Someone who knows your situation.

Unfortunately, there is still a stigma. I hope in the future people will talk a bit more about mental health, because the more you talk about it the more it improves. If you can talk to somebody, if you can find someone suffering from the same problems, it's a great help to know you are not the only one. Things do work out. I wouldn't change my experience because it has turned out very positively for me. I feel that my mental health is brilliant now. I've been through the wringer, but I've got over my situation and I am in a position now to help others. And I'm in a very happy place now, working for myself and having control over my own destiny. Everything is perfect.

I've been a search and rescue technician for just over 6 months. I joined the search and rescue team because I wanted to help people. I also wanted to learn new skills and challenge myself. I developed depression due to abuse I experienced in the past. I ended up needing to take some time off work, and sought help through counselling. My then-husband would always want to know what I discussed with the counsellor, and his constant questioning would often leave me feeling more depressed. When I went back to work, I was still taking anti-depressants and my employers knew about this. One of my colleagues made me very anxious, and it got so bad that I would start to panic and feel sick and very faint when he was in the same room as me. My employers were not very supportive, and made me feel like I was being punished for how he made me feel, and for my depression. In the end, I needed to be signed off work for six weeks because of the effect this had on my mental health. My new partner has had to learn to deal with my mental health. For example, if things got too much for me, I would leave the house suddenly without telling him, and he would often find me hitting a wall, fence or lamp post. When this happened, he would give me a hug and say that things would be ok.

He never questioned me as to why I did what I did; he let me tell him when I was ready. I remember having a long chat through a door one night because I just wanted to be on my own. He sat on the other side of the door, talking to me, and waited for me to want to come out. Knowing I have my husband's support is so helpful. He knows I still suffer from bouts of depression, and he is there when I am ready to talk. He never pushes me for answers and he never questions how I am feeling or tells me to "pull myself up". In terms of managing my day-to-day mental wellbeing, I find that writing down my feelings helps, even if I then destroy what I've written. The act of getting it out of my mind helps me feel calm, and make sense of what I am feeling.

I also try to find 10 to 15 minutes every day for some me time, and maybe try to do something I enjoy, if only for a little while. If you notice you are not acting like yourself, I would suggest seeking help by getting in touch with your doctor or finding some kind of counselling. If you feel comfortable, you could also speak to your manager, just to let them know you are struggling with things. If you feel really desperate, you can call the Samaritans, who are there to listen 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. If you're a friend or family member of someone who experiences a mental health problem, I know it must be hard to watch someone you love going through hell. But for the person experiencing the mental health problem, just knowing that they have someone who is there to support them and be there with a kind and caring word when they need it is so important.

I've been a police officer for 15 years, always working the front line. Occasionally I worked as a family liaison officer, dealing with families who had lost loved ones. I felt confident and competent in the role, but unbeknownst to me it was slowly eating away at both my emotional and mental wellbeing. Seven years into that role, I had to meet the parents of a young lad. As they grieved for him in the mortuary, suddenly my 'shield' – the one you develop as a cop, the one that protects you from all the death and destruction you deal with – just disintegrated. I cried for the first time at work that day; I cried with the family, I cried in the car afterwards and at home later that night. I put it down to being tired and a little run down. But things were never the same.

Over the next few years I deteriorated further. I wasn't able to cope with things in the same way anymore. Anything even slightly emotional hit me hard. The person I thought I was had started to fall apart at the seams. And I still genuinely believed there was nothing wrong with me; that everyone else felt the same, they just coped better. Then, on the 16th June 2012, while working as a custody officer, everything changed. I arrived at work but I just couldn't connect with what was going on around me. I had been like a boiling kettle for months, with a relentless screeching noise in my head – and then, suddenly, it clicked off. There was finally silence. At first it felt great. It was a relief to have respite from everything I had been going through. But the downside was I now didn't care about anything – myself, my family or friends. I just wanted to be left alone. I was no longer functioning and I had no choice but to take time away from work. There wasn't much left of me. The person I thought I was – my identity – had turned to dust. It was almost a year before I was able to return to work. I had convinced myself I was the only police officer that had ever had a mental illness. I thought, how am I going to tell people I am suffering from depression and I'm not the same person anymore? I had two options. When someone asked: "Where have you been?" I could lie and make something up, or tell the truth. I am so glad I decided to be honest and open.

I've never had one negative reaction. People react with empathy, and often disclose that either they, a family member or a friend has suffered from mental illness. How stupid is it to think that people who work in the blue light services, who deal with all the bad things in society, are immune from mental illness? We are not, and there is no shame in that. We teach officers how to protect their bodies from physical harm. What we don't do is help them to protect their minds and ultimately their mental wellbeing. Under the banner of the Blue Light Programme, I talk to new recruits. I tell them my story and hope they see that it's completely natural to feel upset with what they will encounter as police officers, and that it's OK to talk about it. Because talking with a colleague, friend or family member might help process how you are feeling and prevent it from becoming that seed which grows and grows and one day erupts – like it did with me.

This isn't how I saw my career panning out when I joined 15 years ago, but if this is my legacy, if sharing my experience helps to make a change within the service and ultimately helping other officers stay well, then I'm more than happy with that.

My depression has never been what is considered ‘typical’ by society, which is why it took me so long to do anything about it. I’ve never enjoyed being by myself and the idea of shutting myself in a room to be all alone is my idea of hell. Everything I’d heard about depression suggested that what you should feel is a need to be far away from other people and to disengage in the world around you. I know now that there is no typical depression, but before it meant that I never considered there was anything wrong. I simply wondered if this was it and accepted that maybe I was just someone who found life dissatisfying.

In January 2016 I reached rock bottom. I couldn’t distract myself from the pain in my head. I was in the middle of my second year of university and suddenly my world came crashing down around me. Everything that I had planned for my future seemed frightening and achievable. When I saw a doctor, it was only in passing that I mentioned how I felt as I was there for something else. I was lucky enough that she knew me well enough to notice something wasn’t right and diagnosed me with depression and anxiety on the spot. My reluctance to take any medication stemmed from the thought that it was like admitting something was wrong and accepting that I couldn’t help myself. The side effects seemed awful and I didn’t need any more problems to add to my list.

I quickly realised that taking medication would give me the boost I needed to get myself out of this seemingly dark and bottomless hole. It took several months and a number of different pills to find the right ones, but once I did things started looking up. I could spend a few hours at home alone or manage a quick trip to the shops without crying. It doesn’t sound that impressive to be able to go to the shops by yourself, but at the time it felt like I’d conquered the world. In late 2017, with life feeling a little more stable, I decided to go back to university to become a nurse. I figured that a job being around other people and on my feet all day would be just the thing for me. However, four months before the start of my training, I was dealt another blow. I had damaged one of the discs in my back and needed surgery to fix it. Exercise was the one thing that kept me going and helped me clear my head. Suddenly I was lying in a hospital bed unable to even go to the loo without help.  I realised that I needed another solution to help my mental health. Relying on exercise wasn’t going to be enough and I’ve never been able to sit still long enough to meditate.

From my bed I decided that the world needed more positivity and happiness. I started the project Spread Happy. I designed small cards with different positive statements that people could hand out to make other people smile. At first, the thought of approaching strangers made me incredibly anxious. With the help of some friends I handed out my first few cards. I started to get into the swing of it and slowly it became easier. I still have difficult days where the thought of trying to be the happy person handing out cards is far too much. I’ve realised that that’s ok, there are plenty of other days to be that person. Sometimes life calls for a duvet day and cuddles with my cat. If you’re wondering whether you’ll ever manage to dig yourself out of a depressive hole, I hope you’ll think about my story. When I was first diagnosed with depression, I couldn’t leave my house without my mum, and even then I would be crying. I couldn’t decide what to eat, what to wear or even what to watch on TV. Three years to the day that I was diagnosed, I signed up to climb Mount Kilimanjaro to raise money for Mind.

Life can be unfair and unkind, but it can also give you incredible strength that you didn’t know you had. Be patient and take small steps because in three years’ time you could be climbing mountains, having a family or getting your dream job. You never know what’s around the corner – good or bad, you will learn to cope and come out the other side a stronger person. The biggest thing I’ve learned is never to ignore your body or your mind. If something doesn’t feel right, it probably isn’t. Don’t settle for feeling low because I promise you, there is more to life.

“What on earth am I doing?!” was the first thought that entered my mind as I eventually arrived in the tiny Welsh village of Llanberis after a very long journey. I had stepped off the train to be greeted by the huge black silhouettes of the mountain range towering up above me. I’d been anticipating that night for months, but it didn’t seem real until I actually saw the size of the mountains with my own eyes - my heart was pounding, and I felt more than a little intimidated. My nerves grew even more as midnight approached, but I distracted myself from the anxiety by putting on head to toe Mind branded clothing and kit. We were like soldiers arming ourselves for battle – I felt stronger in that friendly shade of blue.

There’d been a long build up to that night. I’d first thought about taking part in Mind’s Snowdon at Night hike just after I had attended a Mind meeting at the central London offices as an ‘Expert by Experience’. I was buzzing from the experience of being treated like a VIP by the Mind team, having my knowledge and experience valued so highly, and knowing that my feedback was directly shaping a review of the information booklets they publish on different mental health problems. I was only just beginning to recover after a very severe depressive episode and had taken a year out of my university course, having become too unwell to study. My confidence in myself was at an all-time low. I’d been traumatised by that year and the memories of being unwell to the point where I was disabled by my depression, and I had no faith in my ability to do anything because I’d become so used to living with extreme fatigue and a total lack of motivation. None of the numerous treatments I’d tried had really helped enough to give me hope, and I’d been given multiple different mental and physical health diagnoses in addition to depression – nobody could really even agree what was wrong because my problems were so complex. It seemed like the odds were stacked insurmountably against me. My entire identity and life had become engulfed by a whirlwind of professionals, assessments, and medication.

I’d stopped feeling able to plan anything because all of my energy was taken up just trying to fight my illnesses, but the spark I’d got from the experience with Mind gave me back that little bit of inspiration and courage I needed to click ‘sign up’ for the Mind hike (it also seemed like it was meant to be, because the hike date was my 21st birthday!). It was strange how much impact that one small, brave act had on me; I felt for the first time like I was really choosing something positive for myself, rather than just trying to outrun the crises life kept dumping on me. I had something to look forward to, something to aim for, something to anchor myself on. Of course, I was massively anxious too, and wondered what I’d got myself into. I couldn’t trust that I’d have the energy to get out of bed in the morning, or have a conversation without bursting into tears, let alone climb a mountain. Thankfully, I had the support of my best friend and greatest champion, who agreed to take part with me. The motto we used to fundraise was ‘because nobody should have to climb their mountains alone’. Symbolically, taking part together was a statement from my friend that she was in this with me, literally every step by my side, and doing it for Mind was a statement that everybody with a mental health problem deserves support.

We also sold little mental health care packages at our university, with encouraging handwritten messages in them, which people could send to their friends. We hoped we could help spread awareness about Mind and brighten people’s days at the same time as fundraising. The climb was an incredible experience. I had no idea how it would go when we set off at midnight, but one thing I did know was that I would not give up until we’d reached the top – there was that inner grit that had kept me alive in my darkest days. The most amazing bit was the surreal views from the top as the sun came up over the mountains. I’d never seen a full sunrise before, and it was breath-takingly beautiful. A super-human energy had carried me up there and I didn’t even feel tired. Everything else down on the ground, all of my memories and problems, seemed so small compared to the huge giant we were standing on, and I felt powerful up there. And I knew that there were people all over the country who were hugely proud of me.

The ascent was hard but the descent was worse, because our knees ached so much from the constant downhill. By 6am we were utterly exhausted and our morale was dropping after the initial euphoria of reaching the summit, but together, we eventually made it back down after 8 hours of hiking, feeling a huge sense of achievement. The idea of climbing a mountain was really important to me as a symbol, especially since we did it overnight. For me, it was physical enactment and proof of the fact that my mental health issues could be tackled step by step even if they seemed impossibly tall, and that the most important thing was always to keep moving, no matter how slowly I had to go. It showed that the darkest (and it really was dark up there!), longest, and most tiring nights end, and the sun always rises again; an image I always found comforting in the depths of depression.

What’s more, the support messages I got from friends and family gave me a warm glow for weeks. I knew people weren’t just congratulating me on climbing the literal mountain, but that they also were acknowledging my more abstract ‘climb’. I really can’t think of a better way I could have marked my 21st birthday and the beginning of my recovery.

As I stepped into my doctor’s surgery, I felt a rush of panic. Was I just overreacting? Did I really need to be here? Was I wasting their time? With a piece of paper firmly in my grip, I walked into the room and faced my biggest fear. As I sat down and heard the dreaded question “So what have you come to see me about today?” I froze. It was as if my brain was not signalling that I had to speak. I handed my doctor the piece of paper with the long list of reasons why I didn’t feel mentally well. As silence fell over the room, my doctor began reading the list and my fear slowly started to subside. I’ve done it. Faced my fears. I am finally going to get a diagnosis and the help I need. Moments later, my doctor handed me a leaflet and print outs from her computer. On this leaflet read “Anxiety Disorder and Depression”. I was confused at first. Was that it? Do I just get handed a leaflet in the hope that this cures my unwell mind?

After my appointment I felt deflated. I had to suddenly deal with this new diagnosis and I had nowhere to turn, with merely a leaflet for professional support. For the following few weeks I took time to come to terms with the fact I had an official diagnosis of Anxiety and Depression. As time went on and my time at university progressed, I began to struggle. My workload became unbearable and the thought of leaving my house made me feel physically sick. A lot of things happened in my life, from a death in the family, to going through a breakup, which all made the waiting and relentless pressure to get the right support even more difficult. I decided to go back to my doctor to see if there was anything else I could do. I had to go back several times to get the help and support I needed. It got to the point where I practically begged to be referred for Cognitive Behavioural Therapy or any kind of counselling. After finally being deemed a priority and endless letters from my doctor to the therapist, I received the call to say my wait was over. After nearly a year of waiting, which is short compared to how long others have to wait, I was finally receiving the therapy I needed. I had a sense of relief suddenly rush over me, which made a change from the usual sense of panic and dread.

It shouldn’t be this difficult to get help. If it was a broken bone, you wouldn’t wait over a year to put it in a cast. Health care professionals need more training. Handing a leaflet to a patient does not suffice. Thankfully not all professionals follow this same protocol. Despite this, it is also not the professional’s fault if they have not received the relevant training. This is just my story, and I am sure others have had similar experiences or hopefully more of a positive experience. It’s time to take action against the mental health care and get the support we all need.

Christmas morning, 2010. I’m in bed with my mother, in a Bangkok sex hotel. It is my 30th birthday. How have things got this out of hand? To wind back a little, I hadn’t been looking forward to a fourth decade. My father had died three years before and I’d responded, with great resourcefulness, by having a comprehensive breakdown, ending a nurturing relationship, and moving back home. I couldn’t work, or go out, and didn’t want to be seen. A life shrunk to four small walls was all that seemed manageable. I was watching the Lion King a lot, and doing all the voices.

So when my mother announced we were going to Australia and Thailand for Christmas, I was unresponsive. Having been in the UK since 1979, she had recently become a British citizen and wanted to celebrate, by flying as far away from Britain as geographically possible. She wanted me to see the Great Barrier Reef, she said. I pictured men in shorts, throwing pigskins at my head. But I had no other plans. The Australian leg was…not good. I became extremely sick, something of a signature move. My mother, basically a toddler, had us pinballing between territories like they were rides at Alton Towers. In three weeks, we flew from Perth to Cairns to Melbourne to Darwin. We spent about 40 minutes in Alice Springs. She was loving it; I was dragging the meat of my own carcass around. We went to Sydney for a single night, which I spent staring at a toilet bowl. In one airport, I looked so rough they nearly didn’t let me on the plane as there was a serious possibility I was carrying bird flu. The night before we left the country, my ex called me on a hotel lobby phone to tell me our dog had died.

Like I said: not good. Still, there was everything to play for. Christmas in Thailand sounded like an idea from a ‘30 things to do before you’re 30’ peak-experience hit list, the ones that fixate on kayaking, taking ayahuasca on Machu Picchu, or inconveniencing dolphins in Cancun. However, those lists are aimed at sexy young couples who like house music, not a depressed 29 year old and his elderly mother. Don’t imagine beach huts, or tinsel-strewn palm trees. Due to a lack of online hut booking facilities, and mobility issues, we were to spend the week sharing a Bangkok hotel room. Many people may have a dated, stereotypically seedy mental image accompanying the words ‘Bangkok hotel room’. Those people would be correct. Instead of chocolates, the staff had left condoms on the pillows of the bed. The bed we were sharing. The ‘door’ to the bathroom was a barely frosted glass slat: a saloon door to a nightmare. A week on a porn set was not how I’d pictured becoming a man. At least, not like this.

So there we were, Christmas morning in a Buddhist land, my birthday, no tinsel, surrounded by sex aids. The thing was, with nothing else to do, we sat in the room and talked. I couldn’t remember the last time we had. Depression had left me uncommunicative, paralysed, angry with the world. There is so much shame attached to not being able to function, and I knew my life hadn’t progressed. I was turning 30 having not realized any dreams. I felt small. Finally talking, though, it became clear none of that stuff mattered to her. I’d done nothing in my whole life to make her proud, yet unfathomably, she was proud anyway. She’d used her savings for us to be able to go away as far away as we could, to show me things, for me to be happy.

I asked her about her life, which I’d never done, having always assumed I just emerged from a fog in the 1980s. She told me she’d been born in a trench in Burma during the war. How her mother had suffered too much to bear, and died young. How my mother raised her siblings. How later, after the death of my father – her husband – she’d refused to give up on life, and instead taught herself a new skill every year: conga drumming, sculpture, digital storytelling. We talked about what it means to surrender your Indian passport forever, and take a British one. I realized I came from somewhere, which is to say I realized I was alive. No one tells you the truth about adulthood, which is that you spend most of it missing people, and only a handful of moments last. Sometimes we have to force ourselves to not shut out the people we love, because they’re all that keeps us here. I wasn’t magically transformed that Christmas – I’m still grumpy, ungrateful and complain a lot. But I started to understand; and I started to mend.

This was the moment I started to come to terms with depression, and how I got out of it. To understand an idea is to own it, and that day I felt the condition weaken its grip; opening up the possibility that I could slip its chokehold, perform a Russian legsweep and flip myself up to stare down its nostrils. I wanted to bark questions in its face. ‘Where did you come from? Why are you so greedy? Why, if you live inside me, do you want us to die? Why does your breath smell like that?’ I will get no reply, because my adversary is a chemical imbalance in my brain. Or a psychic hangover, oozing through the fractures of childhood. Or a tiny statistic in a social epidemic. Or a genetic hand-me-down, a family heirloom like a box of old spoons. Or a tentacled kraken, unpeopling my vessel, dragging my men down to the depths.

But I’ll keep talking, because I want to tell my story. Stories bring us comfort, even when they are not comforting stories, because the moral of every one is that whatever we have experienced, we are not alone. They can be a hand in the dark, a reminder that others have struggled, and prevailed. Mental health is perhaps the most serious topic we have, which is why it’s so often boring to read about. But the truth is there is often a great deal of absurdity to our most harrowing experiences, which is a healing thing to remember, when we feel out of joint. We need more Tales of Depression. Gather round children, let’s talk about Great Aunt Stephanie, who sent 60 consecutive tweets to Sandra Bullock because she had no one else to talk to! Have I told you about the time your father cried for three days because he saw a tree that looked like an old man? And wouldn’t let us turn any lights out? He was like a difficult baby! That sort of thing. In the past I have told myself that I was not human. That I had no family, was marooned from an alien species. Probably a superior species; it’s just the air here wasn’t good for me, which is why I walked double and felt tired all the time. But it’s not true. I just wanted to feel special, to claim compensation for things I had suffered, at the cost of sealing myself away from others. It was incorrect, but it was also a waste of resources. The things that made me feel totally alone then are now what bind me most tightly to others.

For over a decade I have experienced episodes of depression and anxiety. They've been with me from the age of 13 and I believe that childhood experiences triggered the initial development of my symptoms. These include insomnia, problems with concentration and comprehension, extreme fatigue, low mood, lack of motivation, loss of appetite headaches, aches, and pains. In the past, I have self-harmed, had suicidal thoughts and panic attacks. When I was struggling with my mental health and life circumstances, creativity became a place to escape. It became a retreat and a safe space for me to redirect my energy towards something positive that made me feel good about myself.

I have various creative outlets in my life such as singing, writing songs and poems, and playing the guitar. Having these outlets has played a pivotal role in my mental health. From an early age, creativity was my place to escape, and when I started singing and dancing, I felt like I had finally found something that allowed me to express my pain in a way that made sense to me. I would channel my emotions into the rhythm of the music, releasing them into the way I moved when dancing and feeling it in the vibrations of my voice when I sang. With it came this great sense of relief.

I started doing performances with clubs and school, and the more I performed, the more my confidence developed. In the past, I'd self-harmed, but eventually creativity replaced that. It's a much healthier method of managing my depression and anxiety and it contributes to my overall wellbeing. Creativity became my passion and eventually a career ambition. I went on to study dance and music at college, but my aim is to become a professional musician. Recently, I experienced a long period of depression and anxiety, and I went several weeks without leaving the house. I couldn’t perform basic acts of self-care, I would sleep a lot, and stay in my pyjamas all day. I lost my confidence in everything, even music. I felt like I had lost who I was, I lost all motivation and hope, and felt like my vitality for life had been completely obliterated. The spark I had was gone. I was genuinely convinced that I wouldn’t ever get out of what was a long period of darkness. Then I started university. Even though my mental health was still poor, I convinced myself that once I started my studies, I would be okay. I was hit with more difficult circumstances in my life, and my mental health declined further. I could not deal with the pressure of studying and completing essays, and consequently I dropped out after only a few months.

I hit rock bottom, but this pushed me into immersing myself back into creativity. I began working on different projects at home such as revamping and upcycling old pieces of furniture, suitcases and storage boxes, and a few weeks later I began guitar lessons. Learning guitar gave me a reason to leave the house, and gradually made me feel like myself again, allowing me to rebuild my confidence with singing. Completing a creative project or progressing with something on guitar contributes positively to my mental health. Not only does it act as a mood lifter, but it also provides me with a sense of accomplishment. This in return gives me the motivation and confidence towards acting in other facets of my life. By engaging in it, I am caring for myself by making room for something in my life that brings me happiness.

Creativity gives me something to strive for in my life. Without it in my life, I felt completely lost. I believe it is so important to have something that you’re passionate about in your life. Creativity has helped me through a lot of dark times and played a significant role in my mental health recovery. It isn’t always about creating something either. Listening to music also helps me, whether it’s an upbeat song that lifts my mood and makes me want to dance, a meditation or Buddha music that aids relaxation, or an emotional song that resonates with me on a personal level. Experiencing depression and anxiety has shaped who I am as a musician, providing me with the emotional depth to deliver through my performances, giving me material for my song writing and poems. I want to use my music platform to raise mental health awareness and to combat the stigma associated with it and to hopefully help others the way music has helped me.

I lost my father, Stephen, to suicide in 2012. I was 21 at the time, very recently graduated from university. We were living in different cities at the time. I saw him one final time about a fortnight before he died. I remember feeling worried about him. The recession had hit hard, and he had been out of work for a while. This time, on meeting him, it seemed different. As he left, he gave me a hug and kissed me on the forehead. I told him I hoped to see him soon, he replied “Och, you never know” in his softly-spoken Scots voice. In that moment, I felt a sense of foreboding in his words, but I brushed it off.

Then, two weeks later, I woke up in the early hours of the morning to my mother telling me that he had taken his own life. I sobbed and wailed that it couldn’t be true. I felt like my whole world had imploded. I was unemployed at the time, and even leaving the house felt like an impossible task. My nights were fraught with insomnia, replaying my father’s suicide over and over in my mind; the sense of guilt that I felt was eating me alive. When I woke, I felt sapped of all my energy. I became insular and unkind to myself, telling myself that I was worthless, and that I’d never be able to get a good job, or live a normal life. In the initial months after my father died, I found it difficult to open up about it. In spite of my initial efforts to be frank about it with my close friends, not everyone feels comfortable or well-equipped to talk about suicide. Sometimes, they can say the wrong things, and a few experiences of this made me reluctant to open up about it. In that time, I felt isolated and alone. I broke up with an ex, who I felt was unkind and lacked empathy, especially when I needed him to be there for me. It took me a little while to realise that not everyone is going to react in an unkind or uncaring way.

I went to visit my doctor, complaining about different symptoms, like sore limbs, fatigue, dizziness, expecting him to give a different diagnosis, perhaps a minor physical ailment. He asked me if I was depressed - I was. This took me by surprise, in spite of everything that I had been through. My doctor encouraged me to seek out support groups. It’s also what led me to discover Mind, and realise that there were other people who could relate to how I was feeling. I began to read up on other people’s experiences, and really related to what they had to say. I was also beginning to understand bereavement and depression, which helped me to recognise my symptoms and feel more in tune with my mind and body. As the months passed, I realised that I had stopped doing the things that I enjoyed. I didn’t enjoy the part-time shop job that I was doing, so I tried to fill the time that I did have to myself with the things that made me happy. I started reading, drawing, and going to the occasional exhibition when I felt up to it. I also started volunteering at a local gallery a few days a week. I found it really draining to begin with, but I took satisfaction in learning something new, and being able to focus outwardly on something else a few days a week. This helped my perspective to slowly shift, and I began to feel hopeful about the future. I started applying for jobs in the heritage industry, which is what I’m really passionate about. I believe that art can be therapeutic, and could quite happily spend all day in a museum. My persistence paid off, and over six years on, I’ve been able to get to a point where I’m comfortable and in a job that I enjoy.

That leads us to the present day. It’ll be seven years in October, and that sense of loss still hasn’t disappeared (Not that there’s a time limit on grief). There are times that I want nothing more to call up my dad and chat about my day, and I feel a pang of sadness when I think about all the life experiences that he has missed. But I like to think he’s watching over me in spirit, and that he feels proud of how far I have come since then. In the last few years, I feel as though I’ve found my feet again. I’ve made good friends along the way, tried talking therapy, CBT, been on antidepressants. On this journey, I’ve come to understand three things; that there isn’t a one-size-fits all approach to tackling mental illness, that self-care is important, and some days will be tougher than others. My depression has by no means disappeared, but I’m taking it one step at a time.

Before I experienced it myself I held the misconception that depression was simply sadness, a lot of sadness. It wasn't that I was sad, it was a kind of nothingness, a lack of vitality. I lost the desire to do anything and even the smallest task became a massive hill to climb. I didn't recognise what I was going through as depression at first, due to a total lack of knowledge. There is so much stigma that surrounds mental health problems that often we don't feel comfortable talking about how we are feeling and sadly, for the most part, we aren’t educated on it. A lot of the time, a lack of awareness and stigma is what stops people from getting help.

I began photographing myself about 4 years ago. At first, I photographed myself because I was the most reliable model I know, then gradually I noticed that things began to emerge through the images. It was apparent that I was working through stuff without even realising what I was doing. I was illustrating my feelings and emotions, rather than simply capturing a moment in time. I used constructed imagery, digitally stitching photographs together in such a way that they presented as a single, untampered image. I was interested in making images that challenge our notion of reality, exploring the interplay between the possible and impossible.

Three years ago I suffered a mental breakdown due to work related stress. Anxiety and depression took over my life, I was scared to leave my flat, I could not be in groups of people and I found it very difficult to communicate with anyone, including friends and family; in short my world changed and I became very isolated.

It was like having a conversation with myself; working my way through whatever problems were bothering me at the time. Years ago, way before my breakdown, I started writing a journal. At the time I was struggling in lots of ways. I would write for hours, just pouring whatever was in my mind onto the paper in front of me. It was like having a conversation with myself; working my way through whatever problems were bothering me at the time. I have also tried my hand at creative writing, and publishing my first novel Rotten Apples on Kindle is one of my proudest achievements. After my breakdown. My writing changed, it went from being creative fun to a vital way for me to express myself in a calm, clear way. When I write my brain slows down and I find I can think more clearly. Sometimes my brain is in such a pickle that I find it impossible to write; at this point I stop and return to it later.

I found that trying to talk about what was going on was really difficult. I was afraid of how people would respond to what I was telling them. My struggle has taken me to some very dark places psychologically, and these are not really things to bring up in general conversation. How do you tell friends and family you sometimes feel so worthless, that you question the point of being here? How do you talk about how much alcohol you’ve consumed in a day to try to stop the panic and anxiety? People’s natural response is to try to raise your spirits and to come up with solutions. It is human nature to try and fix things, and sometimes this can really stress me out because most of the time this is not what I want, I just want to share what I am going through, and this is where writing helps me. I write a lot of ‘to do’ lists because I find it hard to focus on tasks if they are floating around in my head. I feel better listing everything and then I can pick and choose what I do depending on how I feel. Writing a blog has become a life saver for me. I started my blog ‘And Breathe...’ so I could share my journey in dealing with anxiety, panic and depression. It is there so people can see what I am going through, but also to share information I am learning about mental health issues and the various treatments available. My hope is that it can help others. One of my main struggles is with anger. I am generally very reserved, especially in public, and I would never let my emotions get out of control. But bottling emotions up is not good. I get angry at my wife and our dog, which is not fair on them. I also get angry at myself which only adds to the depression. Society has some strong ideas when it comes to expressing emotions; you have to behave in a certain way, you have to keep calm in the face of adversity even when your brain is screaming at you to run or fight.

In my blog I write as a way to release these dark emotions. But I also want to channel the anger to write creatively again, I would love to create a really good baddy like the Joker in The Dark Night, or delve into the psyche like Stephen King. I don’t want there to be any boundaries as to what I can write. Some people release anger in a physical way, boxing or other contact sports. For me release lies in the pen and the note pad, I can go on a journey and see where my mind takes me.

Growing up my dad had paranoid schizophrenia and always seemed to be in and out of hospital. I was young at the time and didn’t know what mental health was. We didn’t have a great father and son relationship and I always asked myself why me, why my dad? I used to get jealous of other people’s relationships with their dads. However, they say your boxing coach is like a dad figure so I always had someone to turn to and speak to. My breaking point came just as everything was going well with my boxing. I was on a high, ranked number 34 in the UK and had won the British challenger belt. I was in preparation for another title fight in the southern area when I was injured.

Doctors advised that it wouldn’t be safe to box again, and so I stopped training. With no motivation, no goals, no routine, I’d ask myself what was the point. I felt that I’d let down everyone who’d believed in me, especially my coaches. I’d gone from running every day and being in the gym every day to not being able to get out of bed. I wouldn’t leave the house. I became convinced that everyone was talking about me and laughing at me. So I turned to drink, drinking every day. Eventually my fiancée ask me to leave.

Feeling like I had nothing, like I was a failure, and asking myself what was the point in living, I attempted to take my own life. My fiancée caught me and I asked her to not say anything. She was pleading with me to seek help, but I felt embarrassed. I couldn’t speak to anyone because I thought they wouldn’t listen - I was suffering in silence. Then, three months after I attempted again to take my life, I got a voice note from my daughter that made me realise that I needed to seek help, to get out of this bubble, this dark place. I eventually got the help I needed. I went to my GP and talked about how I was feeling. Then I started getting myself back into work. My general manager was really supportive and that helped me a lot. Speaking about what I was going through really helped me.

Around the same time a friend introduce me to a campaign called “Don’t Suffer in Silence”, who hold black tie gala once a year. I was asked if I’d would like to come down and share my story, so I went along and spoke. To see other people speak about the mental health showed me that I wasn’t alone, and from there I was invited by the owner of the campaign to go around and share my story in schools, colleges and work places. Since doing so, many more people have spoken out about their own mental health problem. I now set myself a goal each month. I’ve now taken part in half marathon for Mind and also RED January, and I’m feeling in a great head space. It’s so important to speak out and not suffer in silence. I’ve learned that there are people out there who can help, and I encourage others who feel like I did to do the same.

It was the compulsive way I was using it.I was doing it and then watching a DVD or something, or I was doing it and I was just doing small amounts quite, quite frequently in the evenings sometimes and there wasn’t any particularly good reason for doing it. It was just a matter of habit. If you form a habit it’s hard to break, you know? I don’t think, it really isn’t physically addictive but psychologically it’s easy to get drawn into it.My tolerance increased really fast and I needed more and more of it to get similar levels of effect.

I was brought up in Taunton, the county town of Somerset, in the South West of England. It’s a beautiful part of the country, surrounded by hills and nature. I spent my childhood roaming through fields with my friends, dissecting unfortunate insects, making mud pies and climbing trees. Somewhere along the line I turned into a rebellious teenager, where smoking and shoplifting, snogging boys and dabbling with illegal substances became my norm. By then nature bored me to tears. I thought it was something old people were into and I was way too cool to stop and smell the flowers. I moved to London and after a few years of random jobs and random house shares I found my feet and landed a job as one of London’s top nail artists. I was tending to the nails of celebs like Frank Ocean and Missy Elliott, traveling around Europe, working at fashion shows and photo shoots, basically living my best life. Or so I thought. What I haven’t touched on yet is my history of mental health issues, stemming from tricky family dynamics and exacerbated by traumatic life experiences I had a cocaine habit in my late teens and early twenties, mixed with questionable characters and got into all sorts of sticky situations. I suffered a miscarriage in my mid-twenties and was raped a year later. Truth be told I’ve struggled with depression and anxiety since I was 15, and I’m now 33. When I was a teenager I didn’t take it seriously. I thought that I was just “overwhelmed with life”, as my dad tactfully put it. I tried different things; I read self-help books, I self-medicated with drugs, and struggled on, swinging from the darkness of depression to something resembling happiness. Thankfully in my mid-twenties I was finally diagnosed with depression and anxiety, put on antidepressants and after a few months wait, given therapy. Things improved to the extent that I was able to carve out my glamorous career in the fashion industry. Fast forward to the end of 2016 and I was slowly but surely unravelling. I was at the peak of my career and I’d stopped taking my medication, because, well, I was fixed now wasn’t I? I was completely wrapped up in my career. Then loads of bad things happened in quick succession. I fell out with a close friend, my cat died, I had to move house, a cancer scare, and yet another doomed relationship ended.

It was the perfect recipe for a full-blown episode of acute anxiety and depression with cannabis-induced psychosis for good measure. I woke every morning at 5:30am, I had no appetite as I constantly felt sick with anxiety, I was chain smoking and I couldn’t work.

All I could do was lie on my bed wide awake with Chill FM on really quietly (I couldn’t tolerate silence and I couldn’t tolerate noise), and a bottle of lavender oil under my nose to try to calm me down. It got to the point where I had no option but to return to Taunton, to my parents. I needed looking after and I sure as hell couldn't look after myself. One sunny afternoon a few months into breakdown hell, I watched mum as she scraped moss out from the cracks in the patio. I looked so satisfying so I asked if I could have a go. Before long I’d de-mossed the entire patio and was now trimming the edges of the grass with a pair of scissors. This seemingly insignificant act, scraping moss from a stone, was the catalyst of my recovery. I felt like I was doing something worthwhile, I had a purpose! I could see the results before my eyes. The patio was looking better and better and I was helping my parents by doing a tedious job in the process. But tedious for me it was not! It required just enough effort for me to push the trowel through the soil and moss. But not too much to overwhelm me.

When I was 15 I was diagnosed with clinical depression – something I battled with until I was 19 years old. I’m 24 now and things are a lot better but there are times when I feel really low, which last a few days or a few weeks. Before my mental health problems were diagnosed, my friends and family thought I was just lazy. I didn’t want to go college, meet friends or family, or leave the house. They also put it down to anaemia – an iron deficiency which can make you very tired.

I’d regularly be told to “cheer up” by friends who didn’t understand, or people at school and college who were being deliberately nasty. Because of this I always found it easier to put on a front rather than explain to people what I was going through. I felt like I was in a downward spiral. I felt very alone and like I didn’t want to be around anymore. After I finished college the pressure started to lift, but I was left without a shred of confidence. I felt alone because I’d lost so many friends, I seriously hated the way I looked and just felt confused about life.

On that first day I didn’t know what to expect and was really apprehensive. But I didn’t need to be at all. As soon as I got there the other girls greeted me and helped me with catwalk training and anything else I was worried about. When I first stepped on stage, waiting behind the curtains, I was very nervous and I couldn’t believe I was taking part. The audience was very supportive and cheered everyone. I didn’t expect to win anything; it was more for the experience to see if I could boost my confidence.

I’d spent so many years in the negativity of depression, and pageants came into my life like a bright light. They gave me something to focus on as I was busy working towards goals, public appearances, raising money and helping others. Quite a few girls enter pageants for similar reasons to me – to boost their confidence, raise awareness of illnesses and fundraise for charity. I have made friends for life and now have some wonderful people to chat to if I have an off day or feel low. One pageant I particularly enjoyed competing in was Miss Sensational UK. Romy, the director, chose to support Mind through the pageant and I was so happy to be able to support a cause I could relate to. Together we raised over £1700 last year. I held an online photo pageant for people of any age, race, ability, body type or gender. I also held a local raffle which raised nearly £200. The other contestants raised money by holding their own pageants, gala balls, fun runs, quiz nights and cake sales. 

I raised nearly £300 last year and I want to top that this year. I will be competing again in Miss Sensational UK on 2 December 2017 in Guildford, raising money once again for Mind. Looking back now, I never dreamed of doing anything like this, especially when my depression was at its worst. I had no confidence or self-belief. Now I want to share my experience to help others, as talking has such an important role in recovery.

I always look back at three significant events from 2015 and early 2016 which led me to seeking help. Though these events were triggers, it is apparent that I have been suffering for over 15-20 years. I have always been a high achiever and as a result I have put myself under continuous pressure to succeed.

Early in 2015, I went through IVF treatment; unfortunately, things did not work out. Instead of myself and my partner dealing with it, talking through things and grieving, we both ploughed ourselves into our work. For me, I wanted to get promoted to Inspector and that became my focus. I had already passed the exam, but wanted to prove myself for the board process. I also became obsessive with exercise and began taking part in cycling events and triathlons as I knew I could do well and accomplish in those events and they were giving me a sense of achievement and self-worth. They were a distraction for the hurt and pain I was going through. As 2015 progressed, myself and my partner began to drift apart and the relationship ended a week before Christmas. I could not handle this. I became withdrawn, I did not want to see or speak to anyone and even spent Christmas on my own as I did not want to face the world.

In work, I still presented myself as ‘the happy smiley George’. Whilst people said I looked tired I did not want people to know how broken I was. Why? Because I was going through a promotion process; I had been promoted to Temporary Inspector and things in work were going well for me. I did not want to drop the professional image.

I made the decision to seek help from my doctor. I made the appointment as I was physically tired. I did not see what was mentally happening to me. It was during this first GP appointment that everything came out and I literally just sobbed for 30 minutes. I remember arguing with the GP who told me not to go to work the following day. I wanted to go as I did not want to be seen as a failure or weak so I ended up going. It was midday when I finally said to my line manager that I had to leave. That was 13 months ago. I've had fantastic support from my GP, force counsellor, force medical advisor, the NHS and line management and I’ve just returned to work recently.

It was the best thing I ever did. There is no shame in suffering a mental illness and there are people out there who want to and can help. I have a fantastic network of friends and family who now understand and are there for me. I use exercise as a therapy and walking my puppy; both of which have saved my life. To work in the emergency services is stressful enough without the added extra of bottling things up. Speaking up has now become my therapy and I have become passionate about encouraging other people to do this. This is one of the main reasons why I signed up to take part in the BBC documentary ‘Mind over Marathon’. I'm proud to say on national television “I am a Police Officer, and I suffer from a mental illness”. The Blue Light Programme is extremely important. Having a Blue Light Champion and extra support is what's needed. So many police officers have opened up to me since I've told my story. The Blue Light Programme will encourage this - and give support and further help. There should be no stigma and barriers; the more people open up, the more these barriers will be broken down.

Well at the time I wasn’t really reflecting on why I was using it. I just was but it seems fairly clear now that I was using it because things, I was using it as an escape rather than anything else. I wasn’t particularly interested in alcohol at that point. Like I’d tried ketamine and alcohol a few times and the mix is really not a pleasant one. I think I was sick twice after that and I never mixed them again. I have friends who do mix them and they are fine with it but I could never deal with that. I found the negative effects outweighed the positive effects by the end. It’s not a very pleasant drug. You can get quite intense but very, very gripping fear on it because you can sort of lose your sense of self, and you can have very intense and fascinating hallucinations – but the unpleasantness of it and the physical effect is that you have very, very bitter taste at the back of your mouth and tongue which makes me want to retch a little. And I found that wasn’t really what I wanted to take anymore. I didn’t really want to take a drug and then lie down and just not do anything, just look into the back of my eyes. Well I was afraid, I was afraid. I still I wouldn’t want to go near it  again. I could do it every now and again but it’s the case of the effects not really weighing up with the…

I have suffered from mental illness and depression from a young age, and it totally affected my teenage years. After a decade long struggling, I found street dance and it changed my life. I felt it was important to share my story to inspire others that you can achieve great things by facing  mental health problems.

Having to adjust to life in a foreign country was very difficult. Friends I knew were gone, and the change in environment, school and family life triggered my depression. I had a lot of troubles from all angles in life. This made it feel impossible for me to carry on. I woke up a lot of nights for years simply breaking down and not been able to cope with the stress and the depression. I also suffered from anxiety which had a devastating impact on my daily life. At the time, I didn't understand it was an illness. I remember a particular day I was coming back home after playing in the park, I couldn't find enough strength to get myself home. I leaned against a wall and collapsed. It felt like I was carrying the world on my shoulders. I contemplated suicide at times and felt trapped. I never really reached out for help either, as I felt that there wasn't anyone who could help with my situation. Looking back now I could have dealt with things better.

I was inspired by a friend, and I started taking classes at a studio in London. I then went out and met a lot of other dancers to practice and train with on a regular basis. It gave me a purpose, and eventually the happiness I gained from it helped me manage my depression. The dancing helped recover my life, my studies and get through university. My advice to anyone who might go through something like this is reach out for help. The thing about life is that it changes, and you may never know what might come your way. Last year I performed solo for Dance Show Live nation's best dance act at the Glasgow Exhibition Centre. I also went on to work as an engineer for Rolls-Royce. If someone had said to me during those dark moments that I would have gone on to achieve the things I did, I wouldn't have ever believed it. Opening up about my mental health means that I know I can get help when I need it. My ex-employer was helpful and offered to reduce my hours, and my friends have offered me their support if I need someone to talk or socialise with.

My name’s Stephen and I’m running the Swansea Half Marathon in June. My love of running began around two years ago when I read an article that talked about how running can help your mental health. I have anxiety and depression so I thought I would give it a go.

I started off pretty slowly and painfully, following a couch to 5km app. However, towards the end of my training I was diagnosed with meningitis and hospitalised for two weeks. I was kept in isolation and told it was too dangerous for my little boy Dylan to visit, as he was under the age of one. It was incredibly hard to be away from my family, but I was very well looked after by the hospital staff. Within two weeks I went from being able to run almost 5km, to struggling to walk upstairs. I was told to rest for three to six months and I really felt depressed and defeated, it was really hard to get motivated again but I was eager to get back to running. My brother does a lot of running and when I said I was starting again, he was the first person to offer help.

I started by joining my local park run and trained as often as I could. At the beginning of last year I decided I would set myself a goal and signed up to the Cardiff Half Marathon. I trained hard and although the running made me feel happier, my slow progress made me feel down and my anxieties always played a part in how well and when I could train. But I was determined to run it. I didn’t run for a charity but for my own mental health and completed the run quicker than I could have dreamt. It was the hardest thing I’ve ever done, but I didn’t stop once and really enjoyed myself. I decided at the end of the race that the next half marathon I would take part in would be in Swansea, and that I’d run for Mind. As luck would have it, Mind became the charity of choice at the DVLA, where I work. An article was posted on the intranet asking for runners to take part in the Swansea Half Marathon as part of the corporate challenge, with the fastest team getting a bonus for their charity at the end.

I’ve known about Mind and the work the charity does for mental health for some time. As I’ve had to deal with prejudice and discrimination in the past because of my own mental health, I couldn’t think of a better way to do my bit. I’ve also recently become a Time to Change Wales Champion and I even did my very first talk to a men’s health group at Neath Port Talbot Mind. So far, my training is going well and although I’ve had to rest for a few days due to an ankle injury, I’m very motivated to get back into running. Running with anxiety and depression is not easy and I have to vary my routes, or the aches and pains I suffer get the better of me and I have to stop and force myself to run again. I am getting stronger and hope that completing another half marathon will inspire me to take part in more events for Mind in the future.

I’d heard about ketamine online. I’d never tried drugs that gave you hallucinations before. It was an interesting new experience we bought a few grams off the dealer. We’d found that dealer via business cards posted through the letterbox, interestingly enough. I don’t know quite he’s managed but he hasn’t being caught yet. But that’s a very cheeky marketing strategy and he was quite a cheeky guy. Anyway, I bought some ketamine and got two of my friends around and we had an interesting time on it. And at the same time I bought some drug weights because I was always very cautious about the dosages. I wanted to know how much I was taking so I knew, had an idea what kind of effect I would expect. And again I researched everything very thoroughly online.

The room was cold, and my only company was a camera in the corner of the room. I was being held under what is called a Section 136 of the Mental Health Act. After forty-eight hours of mind numbing boredom and isolation, the time for my assessment had come. My assessors told me that it would be best for me if I went into hospital, but it was my choice, they said. I wasn’t being sectioned.

I asked for a minute to think, and a majority of the assessing team left the room. One of the assessors looked at me as I was lost in thought. I asked her a lot of questions. Could they say where I’d end up? “No”, she said. “There’s a bed shortage in the area. You could end up anywhere in England. I think you need to do it, but it’s up to you”, she said. I bit my lips and heaved a heavy sigh. I knew that there was really only one option. Yes, do it I said. As I waited to be admitted to a psychiatric hospital, I asked myself, how did this happen? And it’s only now, months after the fact, that I can begin to puzzle together what happened. I can’t remember exactly how it began. I went home for Xmas, and it was as though the colour had been sucked out of my world. Everything blackened, and I forgot what leading a colourful life felt like. It was a distant memory. My mind had become like a torture chamber without any hope of reprieve. It was as though thousands of screaming, demonic children had entered my head and refused to leave.

Shortly thereafter, I went back to university. Things went downwards very quickly. I couldn’t work, couldn’t sleep, couldn’t concentrate. I took a very ‘male’ view towards my suffering, thinking it better to be silent and hoping that my mood would pass on its own. As time went on, I felt as though I’d been exiled from the human race. It was like I was trapped in a bubble. I didn’t reach out for a long time. Eventually, my flatmates contacted my universities wellbeing service, but I wasn’t receptive to their help. I had started to drink very heavily, hoping that reprieve from my mind may be found at the bottom of a bottle. Needless to say, no such reprieve was ever found there, and in retrospect I can see that my drinking made my depression much worse. In my depression I often attempted suicide. I simply felt as though I was a burden to everyone around me, and I couldn’t imagine that I would ever feel joy, or anything, again. In February I was in a university bar when I called friends to come and talk to me. I don’t remember a lot of what I said, but I remember vaguely that I talked about pain. I was drunk, in tears and screaming. Security services quickly escorted me out of the bar, and then the police showed up. They would take me somewhere safe, where I could get help, they said. I was put in the back of their car, and was taken to my local psychiatric hospital.

At the time, I was struck by a sense of shame in the back of their car. I felt like I’d done something wrong. Looking back I can see that those policemen saved my life, and I simply can’t thank them enough for that. And this is how I found myself in a cold room, saying yes to being admitted to hospital. It was late when I got confirmation that I was going to a hospital a few hours from my local area. I was relieved, as I wouldn’t be in a locked room anymore, but I was also scared. What would happen to me? Would I get better? My mind was awash with questions, and it was with some trepidation that I arrived at the hospital. Soon after arriving at the hospital I detoxed from alcohol, and we were finally able to get the right cocktail of medication. Days at the hospital were very structured, with therapy and mealtimes. I met people during my time in hospital that I talk to to this day, and who I love and adore. I didn’t expect to make friends in a psychiatric hospital, but I did! After two months, I was discharged. My depression, for the moment, had lifted. I was able to work again, I could sleep and I could concentrate. It quickly became apparent to me, however, that a lot of stigma surrounded mental illness and especially psychiatric wards. I found that there was a vast conspiracy of silence surrounding mental illness and its treatment. I wanted to help, so I emailed the Guardian and proposed that I write about my experience. To my surprise, they said yes, and I’ve been very vocal about my experiences ever since.

I’ve learnt a lot since coming out of hospital. I’ve learnt that mental illnesses are very common – one in four people will suffer from some kind of mental health problem in their lifetime. I’ve learnt that anyone can suffer from a mental illness. Accountants, secretaries, neighbours, colleagues, friends, loved ones. Even astronauts! I also learnt that suicide is the biggest killer of men under 45 in the UK. I found it difficult to speak up, for I feared being seen as ‘weak’. I’ve since learnt that there is nothing stronger than speaking out. There is immense strength in vulnerability and in voicing your experiences. If you take one thing from my story let it be this – TALK. If you’re suffering, talk. Talk until your voice is hoarse. Today, I am happier and heathier than I have ever been. I’ve done things that I simply couldn’t have imagined myself doing when I was depressed. I’ve written articles for the Guardian and the Huffington Post about my experiences, I’ve laughed until I have cried and I’ve loved and been loved more.

I’ve been sober since I left hospital. I achieved a first in an academic year that I was mostly absent from due to my illness. I even joined the gym! (This surprises even me). To be clear though, I’m not cured of my depression, that black dog still shadows my every move, but with each day I grow stronger. I couldn’t have imagined writing this blog for Mind when I was ill, and yet it’s happening! I’m even skydiving for Mind next year! Silence is the oxygen of mental illness. With each word I speak (and write) my depression grows weaker. Every time I talk about my experiences, I feel myself growing stronger. Fighting depression is no easy thing, but it’s a fight I’m finally starting to win.

Amongst some of my mates I’m known as Houdini. Not because I know any magic tricks but because I’ve got a bit of a reputation for being able to disappear and go off the radar. My friends never really knew why, until recently.

I’ve struggled with depression and anxiety since I was a teenager. I had a rough childhood: an alcoholic father and a distant relationship with my mum. It laid the foundations for what I struggle with today 20 years later. When I’m at my worst, I need to pull away from the world and disappear. It feels like utter emptiness – and a physical pain dragging my body and my mind into the ground. I might stare at a spot on wall for an hour. I lose myself in dark thoughts, or just blankness, before I snap out of it and try and refocus on something else in the room.

During a really tough time, I lost touch with my mates for a year. My friends have never really known the dark place I’ve been in when I fall out of contact. They just thought I was busy with work. During a really tough time, I lost touch with my mates for a year. My friends have never really known the dark place I’ve been in when I fall out of contact. They just thought I was busy with work. I never really told anyone close to me apart form my brother. I sought medical help when I was younger and have been on and off anti-depressants. I was never game enough to tell any of my friends for fear of what their reaction might be. My dark world was my biggest secret. I got a call one day to say that Martin, a good friend and someone we met on our football team, had taken his own life.

A few months before we were having a riot of a time at a stag party in Berlin. A few months later he was gone. He was loved by so many people and we all had a close relationship with him. None of us knew he was struggling, not even me. After his death our group was shell shocked. We reminisced and questioned whether we could have done anything better. It hit me hard to know that I had so many nights where I had been on the brink myself. The hardest part was the fact that I felt like if we had spoken and opened up to each other we could have said so much. A few months after Martin passed away I was in the pub with one of my closest mates. “I have no idea what we he was going through”. He said. I took that as an opportunity to tell him about my own struggles. I told him I knew what he must have been feeling because it’s been something that I’d struggled with all my life. We had a chat over a few and everything pieced together for my friend Fernando. Suddenly my Houdini moments fit. It felt good to have someone outside my family actually know.

I’ve been on medication on and off. I try not to stay on it all the time, but sometimes there’s no choice.  I see a counsellor every month which can be hard sometimes, but usually I leave feeling better. I throw myself into exercise when I feel like I have and patch coming on and it helps. The statistics on male suicide are shocking. It’s the biggest cause of death for men under the age of 45. My message to anyone is that it’s okay to talk when you’re struggling. Find someone close and tell them. And why not just ask someone how they are, if they’re really okay. It could make every difference. Now I don’t need to disappear and have extra support when I’m at my lowest. Knowing that I have a bit of extra support really lightens the load.

Having suffered from anxiety and depression for nearly seven years, coming to university was one of the scariest moments of my life. How could I leave home and move to a big city when I’d hardly left the small town I lived in for three years? The day I was meant to leave, my dad opened up the car, helped me put my things in, and before I knew it we were on our way. I had a migraine from the stress of everything halfway there and I was emotionally exhausted, but I managed to make it to Cardiff and before long I was a university student.

The first few nights were tough. My birthday was my third day at university, and at 4am that morning I was on the phone to our university Nightline sobbing my heart out, convinced I’d made the biggest mistake of my life. But I’m sat here now writing this on the anniversary of my journey to university and I haven’t looked back. I’ve been able to get help with my mental health conditions and they’re all but gone now. I also feel more and more confident about facing up to my fears. I’m proud of what I’ve been able to do, but I still can’t appreciate how far I’ve come, and I don’t think I will for a while yet. It’s a big step for anyone to leave home. You’ve lived with your family for your whole life, then all of a sudden you’re thrown out into the new world of university and now everything is up to you; you need to shop for yourself, do all your own washing and keep on top of your chores - not to mention aiming for the best in your degree. It’s an awful lot, but you don’t have to go through it alone.

Nobody goes to university an expert in how best to live away from home. It takes time. You’ve decided to take this step because you hope that the life experiences and the qualifications you gain from there will help set you up for the rest of your life. That’s your goal, but how do you navigate the tricky first few weeks? I remember my first night vividly, like it was yesterday. My dad dropped me off, and before I knew it I was in a strange flat with strange people, and all my things were in bags on the floor of a strange room. A year later, I’m still here. I feel totally settled, with a great group of friends. I’m loving my degree and the city I’ve moved to.

The decision to appear on BBC’s Trust Me I’m a Doctor was not a hard one. It stemmed from a pledge I made to myself at the beginning of my treatment for depression: to be honest with those around me about my illness. Back then, in the depths of my despair, I never imagined considering talking about my own experiences on national television.

The journey from mental ill health to television appearance and relatively good mental health has been a long one – over twelve years to be precise. My persistent feelings of low mood and inadequacy began when I was around fourteen years old, and quickly dismissed as the usual teenage misery that every young person around that age is expected to go through. I had no time for such feelings either; I became used to compartmentalising my thoughts; lack of confidence in myself and my abilities were lumped together with other more pervasive feelings of worthlessness and guilt. I felt too much pressure upon me to waste any time feeling sorry for myself, as I saw it. I did not talk about it, and so I developed a mask for my performance in the everyday world.

Things carried on in this vein until my second year of university; feelings went unaddressed and intermittent complete mental agony was somehow worked through. I tried to rationalise it with the thought 'You’ve got nothing to feel rubbish about'. It was only when I found myself physically unable to get out of bed one morning before a lecture, that I realised I needed some help.

If anyone wants to do anything on a Wednesday evening for the next few weeks, I’m afraid I’m busy. The Great British Bake Off is back, so my phone will be off and my oven gloves will be on. I know I’m not the only one excited for a seventh season featuring Mel, Sue, Paul and Her Majesty Queen of Cakes Mary Berry putting a brave group of bakers through their paces. But I do have a bit of a special relationship with GBBO, and baking in general.

In 2009 I was diagnosed with perinatal depression, then postnatal depression, and then finally just regular depression – it didn’t really matter what you called it, it felt rubbish. Depression is not just about feeling sadness; sometimes people don’t realise that. A lot of the time depression is about feeling nothing at all. On especially bad days you can feel like you’re not in control of anything – your feelings, your actions, your life - it’s a horrible sensation. At my most ill I found myself having really irrational thoughts that food was contaminated or poisonous. It got to the point where I had to keep my food in a separate fridge from everyone else’s. The one day that really sticks in my mind is standing at the sink obsessively washing a piece of cutlery over and over again, then bursting into tears. Hearing my little boy asking my husband “Why is Mummy crying” just about broke my heart that day. It was only after the birth of my daughter in 2013 that I was able to really admit to myself that I was ill, and start proper treatment. It didn’t happen overnight, but thanks to the right medication, a good psychiatrist and a wonderful supportive family things started to get better. I’m not ‘cured’ – I don’t think I ever will be – but I can manage my moods better now. Part of that is down to an unusual type of therapy. It’s not available on the NHS, but you can get everything you need for it in your local supermarket…

The extra helping hand I need on bad days comes from baking. I’m not the only one who finds it therapeutic - 2012 GBBO winner John Whaite spoke openly about his mental health and how baking works for him too. Like John, I believe that while baking is never going to cure depression, it can certainly help with the symptoms. It’s all about control. Depression can make you feel like a passenger in your own mind – your feelings and emotions are in the driving seat, and you’re just along for the ride. But when it comes to baking, I am always in charge. It takes care, precision and concentration, so I can lose myself in it, and keep the negativity and numbness at bay. Making something beautiful that I’m proud of also helps me get back some of the sense of self-worth that depression eats away at. Even better, it’s something that I can share with others – and it turns out, I’m actually pretty good at it! I’ve baked for lots of friends, from wedding cupcakes to birthday cakes, and my favourites, the Lego themed cakes I’ve made for my little boy. I’ve even been able to help good causes with my baking, raising money for several charities including Mind. It’s led to all sorts of charity work and volunteering, which just adds to that feeling of self-worth. Baking helped to bring me back; it made me a better mum, wife, daughter and friend.

My mental health problem has been a large part of my life for many years. I was diagnosed with anxiety and depression back in 2013, but I feel that I had been suffering with mental illness for many years before that. At the beginning of my journey I felt isolated, and although I had my family around me who understood and supported me, I didn't know anyone who was going through the same thing as me. This is when I began writing my blog. I started it not only to find others like myself but to help others too. If I was feeling alone, then I thought there must be hundreds of thousands of people feeling the same way as mental health problems affect 1 in 4 in any one year.

I found my blog a great way to share my personal experience and to help others. To this day I'm still writing tips and giving advice to others through emails, comments and the content on my blog. Sharing my journey this way and battling with my mental health problem has taught me so many things.

I was at my worst at age 17. I was dealing with severe anxiety, depression and suicidal thoughts which meant that I couldn't leave the house, complete driving lessons, answer the door, go to school - the list was endless. I was trapped in a prison of my own mind, and it was hell. Over the years after this however, I had three types of therapy which I am still participating in today at age 20. I’m also taking medication - which has worked miracles for me, and is nothing to be ashamed of. I had tried everything else possible to get better, but nothing was working well enough. I took medication as a last resort and it has changed my life. During the darkest times, I didn't think I was ever going to get better. I thought this was going to be my life for the rest of my days and I couldn't bear it. But today I am at university in Wales, I’m the president of my university’s mental health society, I’m driving by myself, living independently and volunteering, amongst other things. If you were to tell me a few years ago that I was going to doing all this in 2016, I wouldn't have believed you. But, I ask you to believe me now when I say that it will get better. If you hang on in there, your recovery may just be around the corner. 

I always tell people to never be ashamed. Mental health is just as important as physical health and it takes strength to battle your mind every day. The stigma is harmful, but you're better than that. You know what it's really like. Together, we can bust the myths around having a mental health problem. I still experience anxiety and depression, but at a lesser level to what I did a few years ago and there are still things I struggle to do and perhaps cannot do at this current time. Recovery has its bumps in the road and it's not always easy - but you've got this! 

Last year, I gave a talk about my life at a meet-up event to an audience of about 80 people. I was excited to talk about many things, like the time I lived in Japan, the time I was in a band, the time I studied art, the time I worked in India. But there was one part of my life that I needed to include and that was being diagnosed with severe depression.

I struggled to find a suitable slide to represent depression and so in the end I decided to leave it blank. As I came onto this part, I could feel myself getting nervous. I stopped to gather myself and the room went silent for a few moments. The audience immediately picked up on my feelings. One person clapped and everyone else joined in. They encouraged me to continue and I heard someone shout:

I started to talk about how I had been struggling. I revealed that I felt hopeless, that I felt alone, that I felt like I didn’t deserve anything and above all that I felt that I was not good enough.

After my last blog I felt so incredibly empowered after sifting through all the emotional events from last year. The responses I had were so touching and helped me realise how much I’d overcome in such a short period of time. I wish I could say to you how much I’ve progressed since then, and how positive I’ve managed to stay, but that just wouldn’t be true. And if I’ve learnt anything about talking about mental health, it’s about telling the truth - no matter how shameful it may feel - so that people can see the full ugly extent of it instead of the false act many of us put on to mask the real pain of it all. Looking back on it now I can see how naïve I was to think sharing my story would suddenly solve all my problems, but that doesn’t go to say that I’m not on the road to recovery.

It’s just a very bumpy road, as I’m sure many people with mental health problems will understand. For the first month or so after that first blog everything was great. I was sure I wanted to get straight back into the working world and having interviews each week as well as training for the Brighton marathon in April. I had no idea whatsoever that my depression was slowly creeping up on me; maybe I was unconsciously ignoring it in fear of letting everyone down. It wasn’t until about a month ago that I realised something was wrong. I couldn’t quite believe it but I was having horrific nightmares about Brazil along with vivid flashbacks. I’d dream about strangers coming into my room in the middle of the night and aiming a gun at me. I would never actually be hurt but I felt like I was waiting an eternity for it to happen, for someone to finally shoot me. My anxiety rocketed and I started to find it impossible to concentrate on almost anything. I had this sudden worry that I wasn’t living life to the full and needed to just throw myself into it, ‘live for each day’ etc, but I now realise this was due to my irrational fear of dying. It was as if I expected it. Around the same time my physio also told me that running the marathon would be detrimental to my injuries and that I shouldn’t be running for the next 3 months or so.

It was no surprise that I soon ended up face-to-face with my psychiatrist, but for me it was a massive shock when I heard him casually say: ‘well it’s just classic PTSD isn’t it?’. For some reason I could not and would not believe it. I didn’t feel as if my situation was worthy of such a diagnosis, I didn’t feel like it was ‘bad enough’. I guess I also thought people would be disappointed in me for not being able to handle everything in the positive manner I promised from the first blog. I felt like a failure, again. So after committing to a new round of therapy and once again increasing my ever-changing medication I started to feel like I could blame this little downward spiral into darkness on Brazil, and once I was out of that I would be well on my way to happiness and bliss. This time it was my ignorance that got the better of me. Last weekend I ended up in a very familiar place; crisis. I have a whole collection of skills to use when in this situation, and I must shamefully confess that I ignored each and every one of them. I turned each emotion of anger, hatred, guilt and worthlessness onto myself.

It only took a few seconds of complete irrationality to do something I will now be regretting for a few weeks. I look in the mirror every day and I’m confronted with my disgraceful actions. As guilty as I feel, it is done, and I must now move forward and understand why it happened. Part of this is accepting that Brazil isn’t my only enemy; it just served as the perfect villain. Only when discussing this with my therapist the other day was I able to accept that a huge part of my problem now has also been finding my identity since coming out. I skimmed over it in my last blog because I still didn’t want to accept it. Sometimes you have to face your demons no matter how much pain it causes you. I think a lot of people think coming out is a near enough instant process, and that once you’ve declared your sexuality your life changes for the better and all that self-loathing you’ve carried around for years suddenly dissolves into nothing. I would be very interested to find if that’s actually true for anyone. In my case I feel like although I have discovered this whole new side to me, I feel as if I’ve completely lost who I am. Being gay doesn’t change the fact that I still feel unlovable and unworthy of true affection. I willingly throw my self-worth into the hands of others and then end up inevitably getting hurt and feeling terrible about myself. I have hated being gay from the moment I’ve come out because it has been so incredibly painful. But this is no one’s fault, and I guess not even mine.

Although the world is forever changing and becoming more accepting, society still doesn’t teach us that it’s ok to be this way. I can only thank all the amazing people who’ve supported me through it, I now realise the only person who ever really had a problem with me being gay was me. I’m in the very early stages of it all and I believe I will find who I really am. I genuinely want to embrace whoever that may be, and dare I say it, to learn to love myself first. So that’s my painfully honest account of how my last few months have been. I can only apologise if I’ve let anyone down, I hope you know that my fighting spirit is still very much intact, but as I’m starting to learn: life doesn’t always go to plan. I just want to remind people that although sometimes life feels like too much, tomorrow will always be there and you’ve survived enough already to keep fighting. I regret my actions of the weekend so much, and I can only urge others to not let their emotions envelope them; you are so strong and you can endure it even though it feels like you can’t. If no one else, I believe in you. I will keep going on this bumpy road to recovery because I want to use these experiences to help people one day, and I want to live in a world where we’re not ashamed by our mental health and each and every person receives the care they deserve.

Four weeks ago I was travelling through Brazil. It was meant to be one of the biggest adventures of my life but I was unaware of the events about to unfold. I’m now in my bedroom, staring into the looming dark winter’s night, wondering how I’m in what may be the best mind frame of my recent life – all despite what has happened over the past month.

Spring saw one of the biggest highlights of my life: running the London Marathon for Mind and somehow completing it. I can’t explain what this meant to me, and I feel so privileged to have had the opportunity to do it. The elation from this achievement lasted for a long time (so much so I've just signed up for the Brighton Marathon for Mind, but as all people dealing with mental health problems will know - one incredible day doesn’t result in a permanent fix.

I was admitted to hospital for a week after having a mental breakdown. It was completely unexpected, but does anyone ever expect their mind to completely fall apart? I was given six weeks sick leave from work at the end of which I was booked to go on a ten day volunteering trip to Kenya to help in a school. No I had not fully recovered, and yes it was every bit as inspiring as I imagined it to be. Over those ten days there wasn’t a doubt in my mind that I was happy. But I wasn’t naïve enough to think I could drag that happiness back to the UK.

Autumn saw a big change in my life. The very first day back at work I resigned. I loved the people I worked with and was so grateful for how much they cared for me, but I realised I was in completely the wrong line of work which was continually feeding my unhappiness and slowly destroying my spirit. I started to do things I always wanted to do but was worried about how others might react. I got my nose pierced and I got my first tattoo (commemorating the marathon). I finally felt like I was living the life I wanted and not the life that was expected of me. I decided I wouldn’t go straight back to work, and almost on the spur of the moment booked myself seven months travelling: six all around South America and one touring across North America. I had 6 weeks until my toughest challenge yet.

I usually struggle with the Winter as like many others I find it particularly hard to cope with my depression when there is not only darkness inside of you but also everywhere you look in the outside world. I’m sure you can imagine how excited I was to be escaping to South America where spring was about to turn to summer. On 20th November my parents dropped me off at Heathrow Terminal 5 and reluctantly waved me off to board a plane to Brazil. I hadn’t given them the easiest time (especially as I decided to come out to them 2 days before leaving) but they have always supported my decisions and understood my reasons for leaving. It was time to live life and as cliché as it sounds ‘find myself’.

The first 3 weeks in Brazil were an experience to say the least. In this short period of time I learnt a lot about what happiness really is. I met some great people and had a lot of fun. But I also experienced some of the loneliest times of my life which made me realise the importance of sharing happiness with others. There were times when I was staying in places where it seemed nobody in the whole city spoke English. Although I was surrounded by people it was almost impossible to interact with them. I felt like a ghost that couldn’t be seen. No matter how hard it got I vowed to myself that I would keep going and never give up. Sometimes I guess you have no choice.

On Monday 7th December I arrived at my new hostel in Salvador after a 24 hour bus ride from Brasilia. Although I always felt most homesick when arriving in a new place, that evening I met a great group of English people and I really started to believe in myself and the future of my travelling. At around 3:30am the next morning I was awoken by someone pulling open the blackout blind across my bunk bed. The first image that reached my eyes was that of a man in a balaclava pointing a gun directly at my head. There was no time to scream or understand what was happening. I was out of bed with my hands in the air within a second. I remember hearing one of the other hostel occupants saying ‘just give them everything you have, they won’t hurt you’. I was ushered out of the room and into the shared bathroom. That’s when I started to come to terms with what was happening. I walked into a room full of people sitting on the floor, completely silent with faces void of emotion. What I witnessed in the next half hour will stay with me forever. To put it simply, I feared for my life. It’s not until you hear a gunshot go off that you know what true terror is. I must stress, although 2 people were injured, neither sustained major injuries. In that moment all I could think about was how much I wanted to see my friends and family again. It soon became ‘I will see my friends and family again’.

So here I am, 4 weeks to the day and I have never felt more positive in my life. Yes it was traumatic, but I count myself so lucky to be home and safe. The fact that I managed to cope with such an event makes me immensely proud, especially as I was on my own. I feel like this has given me a new appreciation of life and inspired me to keep going no matter what happens. I can only urge others to do the same. Life doesn’t always go to plan, but I truly believe everything happens for a reason. I could have let this event ruin both 2015 and 2016, instead it’s going to be the reason I make the most of my future.

Tonight after a perfectly lovely day I suddenly feel absolutely dreadful. Maybe I'm tired, or a bit stressed or getting a cold which is making my head hurt, or all or none of these things. I don't know, but I'm annoyed that my depression has just hit me out of nowhere again. I was feeling fine a few days before now I’m tearful and frustrated with the world and wondering how I will get through the next hour, let alone the next day, when I feel so useless and worthless.

What I’ve just written describes one of my days this week in January. But I've had depression for two decades now or maybe longer, and it could just as easily describe any day, in any season, at any time of day. I don't know how long I’ve really had depression because I wasn’t diagnosed (or talked about much) when I was a child but I know that some of the terrible feelings I still experience today remind me of feelings I had as a very young child.

After spending a long time hiding my depression and feeling ashamed of it, I’ve finally spent just over a year being truly open with everyone about it, becoming a campaigner for Mind and even starting my own mental health campaign #redefiningresilience to support Mind. As part of my openness, I’ve tried to explain to people that although I might have a smiling face and make jokes, I can often feel very low, struggle with even the smallest aspect of a normal day, and have trouble feeling optimistic about life. Sometimes I feel so ill I find I can’t see the point of it at all.

I’m really delighted to be a small part of the great work Mind has been doing to make sure everyone with mental health gets the respect and support that they deserve by increasing everyone’s understanding of what mental health challenges really mean. Mental health doesn’t discriminate, meaning it can affect anyone at any time. I am very lucky to have a good job, a wonderful husband and lovely friends and family, but that hasn’t stopped me from getting depressed or from having to manage my depression every day.

I now feel a bit less afraid of talking about my mental health with people at work or with people who don’t know me or that I have depression and anxiety, even though it isn’t the most comfortable thing to do. I think we still have a long way to go before people feel like mental health can be a normal conversation. So anything that stands in the way of that makes me feel angry and upset because I think it will only make it harder for people to understand what depression is actually like, and for more people to feel like it’s nothing to be ashamed of. So the idea of a day – Blue Monday – which is meant to be the most depressing day of the year, really frustrates me. It has no factual basis and was created by television channel Sky Travel and apparently it’s on 18th January this year, so we’re all supposed to feel terrible that day. Worse than at any time of the year. Really? That doesn’t sound like depression to me. Blue Monday is absolute nonsense. It completely trivialises a serious illness that affects people, like me, every day. Depression affects people in many ways, from feelings of worthlessness and anger to lack of sleep. Depression is not, and never will be, something that happens on one day only.

I don’t know how I’ll feel on "blue Monday". Although I spend every day managing my depression, that doesn’t mean that I know when I’ll feel ill and when I’ll feel well. For example, I don’t find Christmas that easy; January and February are dark, wet and dreary and can affect my mood, but so can June and July when lots of people are talking about their happiness about holidays. In fact I’ve been treated in hospital with depression during two Julys… so there’s no time of the year when I can guarantee I’m going to be fine and well. Sometimes there are difficult times in my life that have exacerbated my depression, like not getting a job I’ve applied for, having an argument with someone, a friend passing away, and the sense of defectiveness and shame I feel because a few friends or family members seem to deliberately avoid me or talking about my illness. Most of the time, though, life is ordinary so there’s no reason for me to be depressed, it’s an illness that I have had for a long time and I have to manage it. So I just have to check in with myself daily that I’m doing what I can to look after myself, with exercise, balanced nutrition, enough rest, my medication and my therapy, because I really can be blue any day. 

When I first started the role we took non-emergency calls. A few years ago we started taking 999 calls too. The job is brilliant; every day is different. You never know what’s on the end of the phone when it rings. Looking back, I can see signs of mental health issues started to appear when I was a teenager – but nothing was really diagnosed until about 15 years ago. So I had a mental health problem before I started with the emergency services.

It was around three years ago when I suffered panic attacks. I was feeling sick, not wanting to go into work. I had depression as well; you don’t even want to get out of bed, you just want to hide. I work in a room full of 30 or 40 people and I felt like I was the only person in there. You can feel so alone and you just want to hide in a cupboard. It’s like you’re in a little bubble. It was around this time I had a couple of months off work. HR become involved and I put onto a process that monitors sickness leave. Suffering from anxiety, this was a difficult time. And while I can see it from a work perspective – I’m here to work, I’m paid to work – I also have a mental health problem that I can’t control. It’s a tough place to be, you want to be there at work because you don’t want to lose your job, but your mind is telling you that you want to hide and run away.

I worked with HR to see if any adjustments could be made based on recommendations from my counsellor. The absence policy allowed for three sickness periods a year before any HR involvement. I suggested an adjustment of up to six but was told this couldn’t be authorised for my circumstances. At the time I felt that mental health wasn’t being treated as a serious problem – it was this feeling that set me on a path to change attitudes.

It was nerve-wracking going back after being off sick. People think if they ask you a question you’ll burst into tears or something. It’s not that they don’t care; they just don’t know what to say. And that’s part of the stigma. I’ve also heard people talking about depression as though it’s just an excuse to get off work. Hearing that in your work environment doesn’t encourage people to be open about mental health - but talking about it helps me and others, and that’s what I’m pushing for now. The more I have spoken about it in the last couple of years, the more support I have gained from my colleagues, supervisors and management. I am now able to go to certain people at work and tell them I’m having a really bad day. Just saying that can make me feel a lot better. I have also received fantastic help and support from Occupational Health.

I’ve had 10 years now of not being quite sure how my brain works. I woke up when I was 22 years old and felt the 12 months or so of just feeling miserable hit me all at once, a conclusive punch in the face with proper sadness. My experience of depression has gone from naivety of the power of it, to an unconscious buckling at the power of it, to admiring the power of it and working with it to try and come to a happy medium so we can both exist. I was 22, had finished uni, had messed around travelling for a year and was a fun, optimistic, person who would say cocky stuff like “nothing fazes me mate”. Nothing did faze me really but I was quite a nice person. That was the real me underneath that macho bravado, a nice lad who was lost in adulthood. Don’t get me wrong that is the same story for most kids, life’s a piss take and then you’re on your own; things can start not going as well as they usually do; you get a bit sad. But this wasn’t just a bit sad. 

I got aggressive, had fights, drank more, did drugs, tried to fight it off in all the wrong ways. The problem was I didn’t know how to equip myself with all the right tools to slay it. We weren’t told in school that there is a 1 in 4 chance that you will suffer from a mental health problem. Or that we might one day have an illness that can whisper to us suicidal thoughts. If I would have known at the time, I wouldn’t have fought, drank, done drugs. I would have told my family, my friends, my doctor. But there wasn’t just my lack of knowledge about the illness that was stopping me from speaking up, it was the thought that everyone would think that I was a wimp, “get on with it”, “life is hard” all the things that carry the stigma. Let’s face it, when you’re in your 20’s the number one thing that most of us want to do is have FUN. This is complete freedom from your parents and time to do what the hell you like. Opening up about depression to a group of 20 year olds felt like excluding myself permanently from a decade of fun, so I just didn’t. Fun was the only thing that kept me away from the pitch-black darkness in my head when I was alone. I know now that that was the exact opposite of what I should have done.

The depression was hanging pictures on the wall of my skull when he could have just temporarily visited if I had just accepted it and talked about it. I’m now touring a show with my soul guardian/soul mate/ baby mumma/beautiful fiancé about my experience with depression and how in particular we as blokes need to talk about our problems before it’s too late. 78% of suicides are men and this proportion has been the same for over a decade!

I always think about a certain person I know who just does not believe depression and I keep trying to come up with the best thing to say to him and I think I’ve just got it “if I’m not ill, how come taking a tablet is making me normal again, do you think a placebo is saving my life”? Or quite a more real and hard truth “what healthy minded person would take their own life just to relieve mental pain”. It’s a very real illness, it hurts more than any physical pain I’ve ever had.

I really had no idea when we first started how it would go down, but the stats were on my side and 40 depressed people out of the 100 could take on the other 60 easy. It turns out that everyone has been amazing, from people who also have depression, partners, mothers, dads. The feedback has been incredible really and it feels good. It helps a lot to know that the show is making people speak up and be proud in a way.  We’ve had stories from people all over Australia and the UK. We’re all in it together and fingers crossed, the stigma will disappear if our fear of speaking the truth disappears.

It started with a pregnancy, one that was unexpected to say the least. I had gone on a date with somebody that I didn't know particularly well but we had been talking online and I thought he seemed like a nice guy. One thing led to another and I woke up the next morning unable to remember the night and unsure of what had happened. I know that he came back to my house but everything else is a blur. However one of the memories I do have from that night is of me saying "I don't want to have sex with you."

Fast forward a few weeks and I am overcome with worryingly 'pregnancy-like' symptoms: nausea, vomiting, fatigue and food aversion. After seeing my doctor, speaking to my mom and even pharmacists the general response was "are you sure you're not pregnant?” To which I would laugh and say "chance would be a fine thing!" However the symptoms continued and worsened and after having time of work when the morning sickness was particularly bad I realised that enough was enough. I would take a pregnancy test for peace of mind.

I took another test and another test each reading the same horrifying result. How could I be pregnant? I hadn't had sex? Had I? For me, mild depression and a general sense of unhappiness was already something that was deeply ingrained in me that it was almost taken to be part of my personality. However I was now spiralling into a depressive, anxiety filled state like nothing I had experienced. I was extremely shocked and had a sense of being completely out of control, which combined with my fluctuating hormones led to what I am now able to identify as anxiety. Straight away I knew that there was no way I would keep the baby. I assumed that because I was so certain on this decision that the procedure itself would be a relief for me. I was told at the clinic time and time again that "most women feel a sense of relief."

I had never questioned the morality of abortion before but when it comes to your own body you start to think about things differently. I was left with more questions that I could possibly answer and a sense of disbelief due to the complete shock of being pregnant. I carried on going to work as normal but found myself feeling trapped in the office, experiencing, shaking, chest pain and at its worst a sense of being outside of my own body. I was completely unable to function, I didn't care about anything and people at work had started to notice. It was at this point that I decided to leave the job. The depression became my only friend in a time when I felt increasingly isolated. I would come home get into bed and stay there until the next day, with just my spiralling thoughts for company.

The worst part was that I didn't see a future and felt increasingly suicidal. It was then that I decided to seek help. My GP is someone that I have been seeing for many years and so she noticed the change in me straight away and referred me for counselling. A few weeks later I went back as I would have to wait 12 weeks for the counselling and knew I wouldn't make it that far if I carried on as I was. So she prescribed me antidepressants which I have been taking ever since. My experience with my GP was extremely positive and I have been seeing her fortnightly and she has been a massive source of support for me. I know that others are worried about speaking to their doctor and seeking help after hearing horror stories about some people's experiences. However not all doctors are the same and I really want to stress the importance of persevering until you find that doctor that understands you. For me, the medication has been life changing. I feel like I have been given a new lease of life and I know that there is a stigma surrounding medication but again, everyone is different and if something works for you then keep doing it. I am still very much dealing with the aftermath of what happened, however I am getting there.

I wanted to write this blog to share my story and let other women know that they don't have to go through an abortion alone and that there is no 'normal' way to feel afterwards.

Every young girl has to deal with problems but these you would expect to be the likes of… what should I wear? Shall I go out tonight? Or something to do with a boyfriend. Not depression. I considered myself an average 22 year old with a good life. I had just completed my degree in Fashion design - the best three years of my life, then going on to live out my dream of travelling round the United States. I didn't have it bad at all. The biggest challenge I was about to face was getting my first full time job in the real world. I knew it wasn't going to be easy but armed with what I thought was a decent CV with a fair amount of qualifications and experience, the job search started. Who wouldn't want a bubbly graduate with a bucket load of enthusiasm right? Wrong. Days, weeks and months slowly passed me by, as I continued to work my part-time job in retail. Maybe a break from the seemingly impossible task of getting a job was what I needed? So I booked a week off work to give me just that, thinking I could make loads of plans, see loads of people and generally have a good time filled me with excitement. The week off came and I wasn't myself. I couldn't be bothered to get out of bed in the morning, let alone organise doing anything. I found myself getting agitated with my lack of motivation.

Tuesday morning, on went the uniform and I was back to work. Going about my day as usual and catching up with my work colleagues, but I still couldn't shake off the feeling I’d had for the past week. I was a lot slower than usual, unlike my heart rate which was picking up and going at a frightening pace. Panicking as to what was happening to me, I felt dizzy, sick and generally a bit lost in an environment I’d always been happy in. BANG. Standing in the middle of the shop floor, I felt myself lose balance and everything went a bit hazy. An overwhelming sense of confusion hit me and I broke down there and then. Clearly not well. My manager took me out the back and tried to calm me down and work out what was going on. At this point of course, I didn't know so I couldn't enlighten her. This was the first time I’d been sent home for anything, let alone for something I was none the wiser to what was actually wrong. I drove straight to the doctors in a bit of a daze, waited to be seen, ticked some boxes on a sheet and vaguely tried to tell the Doctor what had happened.

‘Depression’, was the next word to come out of his mouth. Immediately my world went dark and a numb feeling covered my body and mind. Me, depressed? I was always the ‘life and soul of the party’ type of girl and was confused by what I’d just been told. Crying isn’t something I usually do, so I got annoyed at myself for doing it, but the floodgates opened and I had no idea how to shut them. Over the next few months I struggled to recognise myself. Food didn't taste the same, sleep didn’t make me any less tired and conversations seemed even more hard work than usual. For someone who used to be so conscious of wanting to dress nicely, I rarely opened my wardrobe door and opted for sweats and a hoody. Low self-esteem had taken over and my confidence levels had hit an all-time low. Being around people terrified me. An everyday activity like shopping, which I'd normally enjoy, left me clinging to my Mum’s side, looking like a rabbit caught in headlights. Feeling like everyone was staring at me, but of course this was all in my head.

People saying, ‘oh you’re just a bit down’ and ‘cheer up, it’s not that bad’ infuriated me. Having spoken to many psychiatric specialists and counsellors during this time, the one thing I was told was that the first step to recovery was acceptance and understanding. I haven't accepted it, but I gained an understanding of depression by learning about it. The day I got my new job was the first time I had smiled in months. But a huge challenge faced me. I had been signed off work up until that day. I was struggling to be around people. How was I going to cope in a new environment? All I knew was that I wasn't going to be introducing myself as, “Hi, I'm Sam and I’ve got depression”. Yoga I believe truly saved me – hot yoga. It was the one thing throughout my illness that kept me focused. Having a set routine in a 90 minute class gave me something I could repeatedly work with, and get better at. In my everyday life at the time I had zero motivation to make progress. Yoga was the only place I could look at myself in a mirror and not have an overwhelming feeling of emptiness. It gave me the beauty of feeling myself again, and not the girl with depression. To this day I find yoga keeps me grounded. It allows me to have head space in a controlled environment, so that my mind doesn't wander into bad thoughts. This worked for me, but there is no right or wrong answer to how to get through this, everyone finds their own cure at different points. For ages I never spoke about my illness, as I was ashamed of the shell of a person it turned me into. I still have down days, but these are thankfully few and far between because I can recognise what I need to do to control it.

Sometimes it's hard to get out of bed in the morning. It shouldn't be – I have a beautiful wife and an amazing baby daughter. They make me happier than I can express here without both boring and sickening you in one fell swoop. But still, sometimes, inexplicably, it's hard to do simple things. It's a ludicrously hard thing to admit to feeling depressed, especially when I have no way of quantifying it. Am I depressed enough, or am I simply dealing with feelings and anxiety that everyone experiences? They don't complain, so what gives me the right to feel self-pity? I don't know the answers to those questions, but I do know that it feels like a weakness to admit it. As a sportsperson, mentality is the key to success. I pride myself on my mental toughness – I feel like I have dealt incredibly well with some very challenging situations, in life and in the sport that I love. Athletics' beauty is in its simplicity. It is completely objective. Cross the line first. Run the fastest time. But what happens when you don't cross the line first or run the fastest time? There have been plenty of occasions for me where that has been the case, as there have for every athlete out there. Sometimes I've made poor decisions, sometimes I've not been fit enough and sometimes there have been injury problems – all things that I am responsible for, but not necessarily things that I have wanted to, or felt able to explain. I'm a private person, something which is difficult to reconcile with a job that places me under scrutiny and in the spotlight. Social media provides the opportunity to explain but it can also leave me feeling tremendously and terrifyingly exposed. I want to share how I have been feeling, in some part to reach out to other people who may feel the same way, but also through a desire for catharsis. But I am simultaneously paranoid about the reaction I will receive – particularly (and most peculiarly) from people I don't know. Should it matter to me what a complete stranger thinks?

What has led me to this point? The 2012 Olympics were an amazing experience and an incredibly proud achievement, but in the 31 months since the end of the 2012 season, I haven't managed to make the starting line in a single outdoor track race. Injury has meant I haven’t ever been able to train fully throughout that time. I've had several lengthy conversations with close friends about how it has felt to deal with a serious long term injury, and why it has contributed to my feelings of depression. The best way I can explain it is to ask them to imagine showing up to work every day, but being completely unable to actually carry out that work. Not only this, but not doing their work takes all day, and by the time they get home they are exhausted and frustrated but yet have achieved nothing. If someone asks me what I do, I tell them that I am a runner. But for the last 31 months, there have been very few days where that self-definition has felt accurate. I feel like I have completely lost my identity. Holding myself up against the training I have been able to do in previous years is one thing that has left me disconsolate and barely able to leave the house.

At the end of 2013, after more than 12 months of pain, problems and inconclusive diagnoses, finding out that I had a chronic tear in my hamstring tendon felt like a solution to my problem. It also meant that it felt ok to start again at zero and to compare each day to the last, rather than to days when I was ready to take on the best in the world. All I had to do was focus on “being the best me" each day. I had a plan and could set about tackling it head on. But I wasn’t ready for the other impossible-to-put-my-finger-on causes of some moments of darkness. These are by far the most frustrating. I like to be able to solve problems, but not being able to pinpoint the problem (or perhaps not being certain that I have a problem deserving of attention) only makes the feelings of helplessness worse. There have been times when I have been ashamed of the person I seemed to be becoming. The main reason for my self-reproach was a complete inability to distance myself from the athletics world – and in particular the performances of others. I felt angry towards those people who were able to compete, and I wilfully hoped for them to fail. These feelings were quickly replaced with abject guilt - I know first-hand how hard one has to work to succeed, and I should be able to respect the endeavours of others. It took a close friend calling me a “bitter old man” (amongst other things) to make me face up to the reality of my irrationality. Hearing this from someone I trust was exactly what I needed. I feel like I can hold athletics at a safe distance, allowing me to be more relaxed and objective about watching the sport that I love. I’m now able to be happy for other people and their success, which has lifted a huge burden from my shoulders that I wasn’t even aware I was carrying.

On some days I still suffer from crippling indecision, where making simple choices or getting out of the house takes hours for no reason other than procrastination. I still worry about what other people think. I sometimes react nervously to receiving a text message or email in case I have caused someone to think badly of me. But the lowest, most lonely moments – when I would think that it might be better if I had some sort of career ending accident that would take the decisions and heartache out of my hands – don’t really happen anymore. The injury struggles I’ve described here have culminated in serious knee surgery to repair damaged tendons. The recovery and rehab will be difficult, both mentally and physically, but the moment the anaesthetist asks me to start counting down from 10, will be my new day zero. It will mark the start of my attempt to make the Rio Olympics, however unrealistic that might seem. And I hope that it will allow me to share the details of my recovery, on both the good days and the bad days. Writing this has helped, and talking to people about it has helped. Talking and trusting close friends continues to help. So that’s the why I am sharing this, because if anybody reads what I have written and it strikes a chord, I hope it encourages them – encourages you - to talk to someone.

About a year before I suffered with depression, I remember stumbling across this saying, by the American poet Richard Wilbur. It stayed with me even then – before I really understood it, and felt the truth of it. Before my life changed forever. 

I didn’t fully realise it back then, but I now see that I’ve always written poetry as a way of helping to explain things to myself. I read and write poetry so that I can better understand myself and those around me. I see poetry as a conversation. When I’m reading a poem, I’m in conversation with that poem and the feelings it provokes in me. When I’m writing a poem, I’m in conversation with myself, my hopes and fears, but also – I hope – with anyone who eventually comes to read it. In late 2012, I lost sight of all this. I fell, bit by bit, into a state of anxiety and depression that gave me a single, unshakeable perspective of the world – that I was worthless, and that everything I did was a waste of time. Disillusioned with and consumed by work, feeling my self-esteem hit rock-bottom and with my personal life spiralling into complete turmoil, I fell into a state of inertia, and crawled into bed. I stayed there for weeks. The most terrifying part of my depression was definitely that unwaveringly bleak outlook. The sunniest days, the smiles and laughter of others, favourite foods – nothing could shake me from a feeling of hopelessness and the thought that I had completely let down everybody I cared about. I’d never known anything like it, or thought I could ever feel so permanently dejected – thinking I’d be better off dead, and probably soon would be. I lost interest in everything, even the things I cared passionately about. Unable to work, my supervisor signed me off to recover. Inevitably, I found myself with time on my hands. Time I would normally have used to read and write. But to begin with, I couldn’t. I couldn’t focus to read for more than a minute at a time. Never mind pick up a pen. For the first time in my life, gripped by crippling anxiety and darkness, taking solace in reading and writing for pleasure wasn’t an option. So I took up running. I don’t know why, but after weeks of inertia I decided it was a good idea – or I decided it couldn’t hurt anyway, and nothing could make me feel worse. Eventually, I hauled myself out of bed one day, pulled on trainers and plugged in my earphones, and headed out. I’d never run before, but hurrying along to the lyrics of my favourite songs, I took to it quickly. Soon I was heading out three or four times a week to clock up a few miles, taking in the roads and rural edgelands of Sheffield. I was hauling myself out of the darkness, and thriving off the endorphin release, the heart-pumping kick of pushing myself to run. Running got me much fitter, and started to give me my confidence back. Along with the right medication, running helped to control my feelings of anxiety and powerlessness. But there was still something big missing. I knew I’d never get back to feeling like myself again, or come to terms with what had happened, if I couldn’t write through it. Again, I needed poetry to help fully explain things – both to myself and, I hoped, to others. Slowly but surely, I started to immerse myself in books again. Poetry collections, short stories, autobiography – they brought me out of myself. I put together a collection of poems, some written before my depression, and some after I’d recovered from it. A collection that I hoped was truer and braver than my earlier attempts at writing, and one that might touch on shared feelings, common experiences. I entered it for a competition, judged by Poet Laureate Carol Ann Duffy, and to my surprise, it won. Now don’t get me wrong, it was very exciting to see a little book of my poems published – to see my name on the cover. But the best thing by far was the response I got once it started to find its way into people’s hands. When people got in touch to say they really felt and understood what particular poems were trying to express, it reignited my belief in the power of poetry – to reach out and to speak to others, to strangers, simply by expressing a shared experience in a memorable way.

In my poem ‘Hound’, I wanted to make use of the iconic image of depression as ‘the black dog’. But I wanted to show it in a different light – as an imaginary creature that can be defeated, and will come to be defeated, time and again. I wanted the poem to be about holding on – about keeping that shred of belief, even in the worst moments of clinical depression, that things will get better. Because they will, and they do. I reckon poetry can sometimes be a way of imagining the very worst, even a way of facing up to it – using words as a kind of weapon. But I also think poetry shows us how to use words as a shield, to help protect us. If ‘Hound’ can offer even the slightest defence against the black dog, when it comes after me, you, or anyone else, then I’ll feel like the poem has done its job.

I turned 40 in November 2011 and celebrated the occasion with a party. I was surrounded by my closest friends and my family, including my wife and two young daughters. I was an account director at a high-profile PR agency, where I managed half a dozen accounts and ran a number of small teams. It was a lot of responsibility, but I was proud of my ability to solve all sorts of problems without needing to bother my managers with them too often. A couple of weeks later, and completely out of the blue, I had a severe epileptic seizure at my desk - full thrashing about, eyes rolling, foaming at the mouth, the works. As that evening went on, I had two more seizures of similar size, which resulted in my being hospitalised for a week, signed off work for a month and diagnosed with epilepsy.

Further episodes followed. Eventually, on a generous dosage of new anti-convulsant medication, I returned to work. And it wasn’t long before I noticed that things were going awry. My memory was failing me. I could have a conversation with someone and, by the time I’d returned to my desk – a matter of seconds – forgotten everything that had been said. And the tiredness… I was finding it hard to concentrate on anything for any length of time and practically falling asleep at my desk by 4 o’clock every day. I was making mistakes; schoolboy errors. A gnawing sense of anxiety set in with every email that I typed, every article that I wrote, and every conversation that I had.

I sought comfort in various epilepsy forums and notice boards online, looking for reassurance that this wasn’t just me, and that it did happen to other people. Others shared similar experiences and while it was good to know I wasn’t alone in this after all – it still proved cold comfort. The thing is, I have been living with another problem for a lot longer than epilepsy.

I’d battled with depression on a number of occasions over the past 20 years or so, and found myself sinking to some real depths during this time. Following the epilepsy diagnosis, I was imploding magnificently. By this time my wife had, of course, noticed that something was wrong and pressed me on it. At first I resisted and clammed up, as I always do when I feel the first signs of depression coming on; I realise that it’s counter-intuitive, but I never want to be perceived as a burden. In the end though I caved and told her everything. She helped me see these mistakes weren’t necessarily my fault.

After thinking on this further, I took a deep breath and called a meeting with my line manager and HR manager and told them of my concerns. I had to admit that, for now at least, I felt I could only manage a job where I was told what to do, rather than one where I was responsible for business decisions, for strategy, for people management. I wanted to be managed, not manage. Fortunately, my employers agreed to creating a new role where these expectations could be met.

However, the mistakes continued to build up, as did the stress that went with them. I had now lost my appetite, couldn’t sleep, and just wanted to curl up on the sofa and never leave home. I knew these feelings, having experienced them before, and I did not welcome them. The whole situation came to a head when I called another meeting with my line manager and told her that I could no longer cope. And then proceeded to start crying in her office.

Here was I, a 40 year-old father of two, sobbing in front of my boss in the office. Anyone looking in could see that something had gone seriously wrong. I had reached my lowest ebb ever. I was signed off from work for four weeks. For a while there was still a crippling anxiety, a terrible knot in my stomach, at the thought of returning to work. But during this time I did my best to enjoy my family; taking the kids to school, cooking their meals. I caught up with books, films and games that I’d neglected. I walked. I spent evenings with my wife. Eventually I felt stronger, or strong enough at least, to return to work.

çNow, almost three years on, I’ve had no more seizures – although it’s likely I’ll always be on medication, and I take a lot more notes than ever before to compensate for my crappy memory. I‘ve felt my confidence slowly return, and a course of cognitive behavioural therapy has armed me with a series of techniques that I can use to tackle any negative thoughts I might have.

I’m not going to lie, I still have down days, full of self-loathing and disappointment; days where I question what I’m doing, where I have to summon up the will to leave the house. The knot’s still there now and then, and I have the occasional sleepless night, but all of these are fewer and less frequent than before.

I know I’m extremely blessed in having a supportive wife who understands and is used to my depression, and that I work for a company that really looks after its employees. I know that not everyone can be that lucky. What I would say though, is that sometimes, as much as you don’t want to, it can help to listen to those who genuinely have your best interests at heart. And sometimes, although it’s hard, it can pay to admit that you’re out of your depth, that you can no longer cope, that you’ve reached the end of your endurance. There really is no shame in doing this and sometimes – and once again I appreciate just how fortunate I am - it can all work out in your favour.

University is stressful for everyone. It’s tiring, you’re skint, usually you’re away from home and you’re convinced that you need to socialise to be a ‘real’ student. Depression can be a struggle at any time. It’s not like you wake up one morning and tell it to go away until you’ve caught up with your coursework. It’s a constant battle in your own head, trying to get it all done when you’re also getting weighed down by anxieties and low mood. You hardly feel inspired. Even though there are a few hundred other students on my programme, I constantly feel singularly pressured with my deadlines. I feel like it takes me ten times longer to do anything. It seems strange that you can feel bedbound and achieve nothing when you work from your laptop. But it’s difficult to pull yourself out of a negative mental state, one that can drain you physically as much as having the flu can. Some days I just have to wake up to feel exhausted. I have always felt low, since I was a child. It’s something my primary school, secondary school and college all noticed but, not unlike many other people, nothing was done about it. Sometimes I just don’t feel like I have the energy to move, I find myself almost paralysed. I become trapped in my head with thoughts that, in the past, have led me to abandon my education. I have gone to university once before, when I was 18. I immediately felt worse. After having my bag stolen four times in three months, I became incredibly anxious about going anywhere alone, and so it became almost impossible to go to university.

Something about the bus to campus just completely froze me with fear. It was always packed, and I felt like I couldn’t breathe. I was terrified I would anger someone if I was breathing too loudly, and felt disgusted by the thought of breathing in air contaminated with their germs. Soon I only left the house for work, a means to an end so I could afford to pay off my year’s rent and move to the city where all my friends were. I only ate takeaway delivered to me as I couldn’t face going to the supermarket on my own, and I soon gained a lot of weight... but I just didn’t care. I felt like there was no long term for me anymore, there were no consequences to not going to class. I had become numb in the daily flood of morbid thoughts. I don’t know how many times my housemate had to pick me up from the bathroom floor, or come get me at work. She’s the only person who physically supported me. Even though I had a few friends down the other end of the phone, I didn’t feel like anyone would stop me. After a gap year I went back to university in the city I come from. I’m in my third year now and have decided recently to try medication. University is a painful reminder to me of the worst time of my life, and a reminder of how much I feel like I failed myself and my family. I do struggle to complete assessments, turn up to lectures or even care. Then I remember I do care and that can be just as upsetting when I get a disappointing grade or I fall behind.

Despite my struggle getting my degree, on my better days I know that I’m achieving something. Not just by getting an education, but by doing something I couldn’t do before when I was crippled by my depression. I respect everyone who studies that also struggles with mental health. It isn’t easy to use your brain logically when it turns against you emotionally. As for my future career prospects and succeeding in my degree, I now have the invaluable support from my sisters, friends and my boyfriend. In the end it may take me ten times longer to write an essay, but I will graduate. And it’ll all be worth it because of everything I’ve overcome.

I have been living with depression for a while now. I suspect it started as postnatal depression, soon after my second child was born over 3 years ago, but I can’t pin down exactly when or why it started, which is one of the hardest things. I live in a beautiful part of the country, have a loving husband and two amazing children. I have a job I enjoy, my own house, and some wonderful friends and family. So why do I feel so bad? Not being able to blame anything tangible and specific is the most frustrating part of how I feel. It makes getting better so much harder – I just don’t know where to start. I don’t see the good in my life any more. I have forgotten how to appreciate the little things. On bad days, I exist in a world that seems devoid of any colour and I just have to concentrate on getting through this dreary world to the next day. Maybe when the next day comes, there may just be a glimmer of colour and it will be a little easier. I know I’m the only person that can make myself better. I can take antidepressants, go to counselling and look to friends for help and support, but getting better will ultimately come from me.

But where do I start? I have tried to blame so many things in the hope that if they change, life will get better. I thought it may be that I get no time to myself because of always having the children, so I have used more childcare. I thought it may be that I need to work, so I got a job. I have most recently decided it is all my husband’s fault and thought about ending the relationship – luckily I realised in time that I am not myself at the moment and this is not how I really feel. The truth is that some small changes have helped a little, but there is no one thing or set of things I can blame and so I have to acknowledge that getting better is going to be a long process.

But I do have a plan. I want to gradually put the joy back into my life. I want to feel ridiculously proud of the small achievements my children make and be able to laugh with them at the smallest things. I want to feel alive again and to be able to look forward to things. So I need to work out how I get the joy back. I am going to try new things. I have recently joined a running group as exercise is good for the mind. It’s true, I do feel better afterwards. I have also joined a choir because I loved music at school and it means I have met a whole new group of people. For a couple of hours a week, I forget everything else and concentrate on something different.

I know I also need to make some changes that are a little less tangible. I think I need to be more mindful of what is going on around me. I spend quite a lot of time outdoors but don’t really ever take in what I see. The changing autumn leaves, a stunning sunrise or sunset; I am often so consumed by my own thoughts that these go unnoticed. Noticing these things again would help bring in a glimmer of colour and a touch of joy. Then maybe, just maybe, bit by bit life will become rich with colour and joy again. So that is what I am going to do.  I will do it and I believe life will get better. Getting started is always the hardest part.

I have been living with depression for a while now. I suspect it started as postnatal depression, soon after my second child was born over 3 years ago, but I can’t pin down exactly when or why it started, which is one of the hardest things. I live in a beautiful part of the country, have a loving husband and two amazing children. I have a job I enjoy, my own house, and some wonderful friends and family. So why do I feel so bad? Not being able to blame anything tangible and specific is the most frustrating part of how I feel. It makes getting better so much harder – I just don’t know where to start. I don’t see the good in my life any more. I have forgotten how to appreciate the little things. On bad days, I exist in a world that seems devoid of any colour and I just have to concentrate on getting through this dreary world to the next day. Maybe when the next day comes, there may just be a glimmer of colour and it will be a little easier. I know I’m the only person that can make myself better. I can take antidepressants, go to counselling and look to friends for help and support, but getting better will ultimately come from me.

But where do I start? I have tried to blame so many things in the hope that if they change, life will get better. I thought it may be that I get no time to myself because of always having the children, so I have used more childcare. I thought it may be that I need to work, so I got a job. I have most recently decided it is all my husband’s fault and thought about ending the relationship – luckily I realised in time that I am not myself at the moment and this is not how I really feel. The truth is that some small changes have helped a little, but there is no one thing or set of things I can blame and so I have to acknowledge that getting better is going to be a long process. But I do have a plan. I want to gradually put the joy back into my life. I want to feel ridiculously proud of the small achievements my children make and be able to laugh with them at the smallest things. I want to feel alive again and to be able to look forward to things. So I need to work out how I get the joy back. I am going to try new things. I have recently joined a running group as exercise is good for the mind. It’s true, I do feel better afterwards. I have also joined a choir because I loved music at school and it means I have met a whole new group of people. For a couple of hours a week, I forget everything else and concentrate on something different.

I know I also need to make some changes that are a little less tangible. I think I need to be more mindful of what is going on around me. I spend quite a lot of time outdoors but don’t really ever take in what I see. The changing autumn leaves, a stunning sunrise or sunset; I am often so consumed by my own thoughts that these go unnoticed. Noticing these things again would help bring in a glimmer of colour and a touch of joy. Then maybe, just maybe, bit by bit life will become rich with colour and joy again.

So that is what I am going to do.  I will do it and I believe life will get better. Getting started is always the hardest part.

"We missed you at the party last night. Your husband said you weren’t feeling well. Are you feeling better now?" "A little, yes." "Was it your tummy?" "No, actually. It was my head. It’s a bit like a stomach bug, but it takes place in my mind." And that is how I experience depression. I don't claim to speak for everyone. Mental health problems, such as depression, take many forms just as physical health problems are diverse. And, like physical illness, mental ill health does not discriminate. Although certain characteristics or circumstances may make you more vulnerable than others, anyone can experience a mental health problem. I wish everyone could see mental health, and the other side of that same coin, mental illness, as they do physical health or illness. The last ten days has been exactly like having a stomach bug. I’ve been really unwell. I’ve been feeling low, some days so low that I’ve not been able to get out of bed or leave the house or be around other people. I’ve been really sick and found it hard to get on with my life.

My life is full and fulfilling. I have a job, a husband and friends. I have interests and passions in which I am fully engaged. I have built a sense of wellbeing that centres around doing things I believe in and value, connecting with people who inspire me and who I care about. I give what I can to those around me and the world I live in. I try new things, developing new knowledge, skills and perspectives and a better awareness and appreciation of the world in which I live. Exercise, good sleep and a balanced diet helps to keep me well. And I feel blessed to be alive, when for almost ten years I lived with death on my door and in my mind. Blessed to have health and love and security in my life. But every so often I get sick. Sometimes, I can connect it to something I have experienced that may have set off old thoughts and feelings in an unhelpful pattern that I can recognise. Sometimes though, I miss it and I don’t realise until it’s too late. And sometimes, I simply have no idea where it came from. Just like a stomach bug. And, just like a stomach bug, I start to have symptoms. I feel low and am easily upset. I feel tired and lethargic. I feel even more sensitive than usual. My thoughts become very negative and then cruel. I get abusive - occasionally to the people I love most, but mostly to myself. I am vicious to myself. Just like a stomach bug, my mind cramps and twists and turns. I can’t concentrate. I don't want to do anything, but can’t bear doing nothing. And, as always when you’re ill, you begin to feel like it will never get better.

But, unlike a stomach bug, my mind virus comes with a shame that means I cannot ask my friends for help or even tell them what is happening. I’m too ashamed, and too scared that I might never get better, that this sickness might completely devour me, as it has done in the past. Because that is part of the sickness. It tells me that I am sick because I am a weak or bad person who just can’t cope with life and doesn't deserve to have what other people have (a job, a husband, interests, friends, etc). And because your mind dictates your sense of reality and self, it can take over your life far more than a stomach bug. Even those friends who do want to help don't know how to. They too are scared of the mess that pours out of my mind. They don't understand that, just as the contents of your stomach change when you get sick, so the content of your mind changes and it doesn’t always look pretty. And they respond either by pretending nothing is happening or by looking plain terrified. And who can blame them? No-one likes to discuss the elephant in the room. But all I want to say, is that it doesn’t need to be this way. I have an illness. It’s recurrent, it’s vicious, it’s horrible. But it doesn't have to be life threatening. With the right response, it can go as often as it come and it doesn’t have to exclude living a wonderful life. It is not a measure of my worth.

I want to live in a society that is better able to tolerate and deal with emotional diversity, that redefines images of success and normal, that promotes social and emotional wellbeing and that prioritises understanding and supporting mental wellbeing in the same way that it prioritises physical health or economic growth. So let’s talk. I’m no different from anyone else. I’m no better or worse. I’m human. But I do have an illness. So could you or anyone you know. It’s treatable and manageable and we mostly know how. So let’s talk about it.

I am forever encouraging people to take up sport. It gave me the confidence, belief and determination to make it to where I am today. Everything I do now is in an attempt to pass these benefits on to as many people as possible. It is my belief that everyone should have the feeling of being 100 feet tall, and not just once but every day of their lives. The only way I know to make that a reality for people, is to introduce them to the thing that made me feel that way. Although I was lucky to reap the rewards of my sporting career a long time ago, it has been a gift that keeps on giving in so many ways. Most recently sport came to the rescue for me in a much more tangible way. I had a tough time at university. Not being one for going out on the drink regularly contrasted with my ongoing struggle with education to leave me in no man’s land. With a long distance relationship and an even longer list of injuries to top it off, I stopped enjoying myself. This feeling of unhappiness eventually manifested itself into depression.

I can guarantee that my depression wasn’t as bad as what some people unfortunately experience, although it was probably worse than what some other people have experienced. The problem I found with depression is the insidiousness of it. I didn’t see it coming and was completely unprepared. Due to the individual differences in each case of depression, I found no clear cut examples and advice on how to beat it. Most of the things that I was being advised to do, and that had worked for other people, were either ineffective for me, or beyond what I was prepared to do. My apathy and unwillingness to do anything outside of staying in bed ruined my university experience and unhelpfully, it was pure timing that changed my course. The turning point for me was the healing of my torn hamstring. On one of my good days I dragged myself to the gym, having built up a substantial level of injury induced cabin fever, and spent maybe 10 minutes messing around with a basketball before getting bored and going home. That was the moment. This is how sport saved me.

I had enjoyed doing something! I had gotten out of bed and moved. This lead to me doing it again the next day, and the next day and so on, every time staying a little longer and coming back a little happier. The momentum playing basketball gave me lead me to tell my housemates about the problems I was having, and despite my previous behaviour they were wonderful.

Getting up and playing basketball gave me a routine. If I was having a bad day, I could spend 5 hours in the gym. Alone, sorting my problems out in my head, one at a time, while mindlessly shooting and dribbling the ball. The exercise was as therapeutic as the clarity of thought it gave me, and the time spent playing put me on a path to joining the uni basketball team, pushing me further back into society, and into more friends. Eventually, and I have no idea when, I got clear of the depression. It tries to come back every now and again, but I am getting better at spotting it early and I throw myself into my own brand of sport therapy. As I said before, depression is different for everybody. But as another option for you to try, sport and exercise gave me my life back. It gave me control and time away from my toxic routine to think clearly. Exercise releases the feel good hormones – endorphins, making you feel better instantly and giving you a much needed kick of energy. Exercise can also give you control over your body and a sense of achievement, which is the first step of gaining control over other aspects of your life.

Apparently 1 in 4 people will experience some kind of mental health problem in the course of a year and mixed anxiety and depression is the most common. That is a LOT of people. There may still be a stigma attached to depression, but these figures prove that you are not alone in it, and if enough people talk about depression then hopefully more people will get the help they need. If you are feeling any level of depression at all, I'm always happy to chat on Twitter. I know what it’s like and everyone deserves to get the unbelievable support that I received. Also, if you are at university I highly recommend you inform them that you are struggling with depression. They act quickly and supportively, I let my tutor know what was going on and the response of the university was phenomenal. Depression is very common at university and they have a lot of resources and understanding of your problems, making life so much easier. You can also get in touch with your local Mind.

My sister is about to graduate this summer. In celebrating this achievement with her it has given me some time to reflect on my own time at university. I won’t be alone in admitting that my own time at university was difficult for my mental health. However, it was also turning point year for me. I was diagnosed as having depression and started, slowly, a series of treatments and techniques to get myself well. I can’t begin to tell you how alone I felt back then. I felt like a black sheep, constantly pushed aside and unable to understand why I was feeling so low. I would frequently find myself silent and in the foetal position when things were tough and not going my way. I felt that I shouldn’t feel the way I did, I was from a loving home and had a great upbringing – mental illness isn’t something I should have. But it can hit anyone. In a lot of ways I was lucky, where so many people like me aren’t.

Reluctantly I went, but looking back this was really my first step back on the road to recovery. After bottling up your emotions for so long, I couldn't believe what a relief it was to finally admit to someone else exactly how I felt. It isn’t uncommon for people, particularly men, suffering from mental health problems to bottle up how they are feeling. It shocked me the first time that I heard the biggest killer of men aged 18-30 (the age group I am in) was suicide. But I genuinely believe that talking about how you feel can help. Shortly after my diagnosis I found myself in my first counselling session. I’m not going to pretend that just going to a couple of counselling sessions cured me, but very slowly I was able to start seeing a change in myself. The more I opened up in counselling, the less of a burden I felt on my shoulders. What was always reassuring with my talking therapy was that it felt like that load was being shared, I felt I was being supported.

It is an odd journey to go on from not wanting to talk about yourself and being a closed-off person to being able to open yourself up to someone you have never really met before. In some ways I think it is much easier to open yourself up to someone that you don’t know, apart from in this counselling capacity. It is a relationship you wouldn’t be able to have with anyone you know already and I found myself discussing thoughts that I had pushed so far to the back of my mind, I didn’t even know I had them. I know from my personal experience that it can be incredibly difficult to start talking about your problems. However, I believe that it was by opening myself up that I was able to identify some of the things that triggered my illness. I used talking therapy to help me to figure out why I was feeling the way that I was.

It has been six months since I was first diagnosed with depression. It has been an up and down slope towards recovery, and I’m definitely not completely there yet. I am a second year PhD student and to be honest, I’m surprised I’m still doing it. I want to talk about what has helped me recover. One of the most difficult decisions I made was telling my boss/supervisor about the illness. I had to, because I couldn’t work at the same level anymore and I was struggling to keep up. If you don’t tell your boss, perhaps you can tell another member of staff or an advisor, but from my experience I would say don’t suffer in silence, especially if it’s affecting your ability to work. 

Taking medication was a bit of a last resort for me. I never wanted to take any but this I can say for sure, it has worked. So when you have tried exercise, pushing yourself to socialise, relaxation techniques and whatever else, and you are still stuck in a rut, I would say consider it. I was told ‘If you had a broken leg you would fix it, so there is nothing wrong with taking anti-depressants’…or something like that. I also highly recommend counselling, my counsellor was fantastic, and was a big part of the recovery process.

I am lucky enough to have a green space near my work place and if I ever felt a wave of anxiety I used to escape there. I couldn’t appreciate how beautiful things were at the time, but it did make me calmer. See if you can find a green space you can escape to if you need to, even if it is just a lawn with a flower bed.

Multivitamins, vitamin D, Tyrosine, Tryptophan have all been thrown into my daily supplements. I’m sure you have read tyrosine and tryptophan are pre-cursers to serotonin and dopamine, so if you are not getting enough of these in your diet maybe give supplements a go.

This sounds stupid but it really works, especially if you like your day to have a bit of structure. For some reason it makes the week more manageable for me. Try to put in social activities if you can. This doesn’t have to be going out with people; it can be a phone call or sending a letter, or whatever you want to do. Which leads on to my next point.

Keep in contact with the people you love the most. My mum used to call me every day when I first became ill, because she has had depression and anxiety problems too. Talking to someone who has experienced the same feelings and thoughts as you is extremely therapeutic for me, and I was surprised how similar our thought processes and emotions were. If you don’t know anyone who has had depression or anxiety problems try reading a written personal account. Like some of the ones on Mind's website!

This is a bit of a weird one. If you are depressed you will probably stop enjoying the things you used to, so try again and again until you enjoy it again. You maybe won’t do the first few times, but you should do eventually.

Eat well, even if you don’t feel like cooking! One of my friends gave me a graze subscription for my birthday and this was great, because I got to try lots of different snacks and find out which ones were tastiest, and I never felt bad eating them. Exercise is difficult because you feel so whacked out all the time. Try doing a little bit a few times a week, instead of going once a week and wearing yourself out. And keep going. Keep carrying on. Recovery can be slow but you will get better. It can be a tough battle, but it’s definitely one you can win.

Recently I was trying to explain to my partner what it was like to struggle with depression. He was finding it hard to understand. ‘But you look normal,’ he said. It’s true. I haven’t got a plaster cast on my leg, or a sling on my arm, or a bandage on my head. But I’m hurting all the same. Being physically ill or injured is acceptable in society yet being mentally ill is a silent hidden illness. It is seen as a sign of weakness by many and often still a taboo subject. I have always been open and honest about my experiences, but I know plenty of people who have hidden their problems for months or years for fear of being judged. ‘But people think I’ve got it all,’ a friend confided in me recently, ‘I’ve got no reason to be depressed.’ But it’s not about how much you’ve got. It’s an illness and it doesn’t care who it gets. Granted some people can find there are moments which triggered their depression - a difficult family history, early experiences and loss. But there’s no set ‘type’. In fact it’s often the strongest ones who keep on going and care for others who ‘get bit’ the most. For me, my first proper episode of depression struck after the birth of my second child. I was struggling with a toddler and a colicky baby. It was hard and I felt broken, I went sobbing to the doctors when he was four months old. His colic was better, but I was not. I felt like a rubbish mother, a failure and that life would never get better. I got prescribed three months’ supply of Prozac and that was all that I was offered at the time. Things gradually got better but it came back each winter. The feelings of hopelessness, worthlessness, wanting to hibernate, feeling like a failure and the snappiness and tearfulness that went with it.

I think there needs to be, I mean they advise you that, a lot of the bad, points, you know, they, they give you the concerns about health and drug overdose and alcohol abuse and, but I think they need to realise and, and voice to the fact that young people, a lot of people do still try these things, you know there’s, and people are always, there’s always going to be some people who want to and will, and I think they should acknowledge that and say, Okay here’s all the bad things, but if you still want to do it, if you’ve got any questions, you know, ask this person or, you know, if you, if you’ve. I think there needs to be more, a bit more open about the fact that people will still want to do it and not just go on about the bad points because, you know, give, give the, give the arguments against them, you know the, tell people about the bad points, the negatives of it but also say, But if you’re still going to do it then, yeah if you’ve got any questions then you can speak to your Doctor or you can go to this website and, you know, if, if there’s anything you’re unsure about. Ask, it’s not just that yeah you shouldn’t do it, don’t do it. Yeah I think they just need to maybe, provide more of a, yeah more services to, for people to access yeah it’s, they’ve got or if they want to stop, whether they want to talk about it or they’ve just got questions on it without being told, yeah the, just the bad sides if they’ve got questions about it then they should be able to be, ask that quite openly I think without worrying about being scolded for doing it.

My worst depression came during the breakup of my marriage three years ago. I hadn’t seen it coming and I was already depressed. This episode knocked me off my feet completely. I remember dark times of feeling completely alone, like a person on a cliff edge with the rocks crumbling around me into a stormy sea. I was drowning in despair and saw no light at the end of the tunnel for those darkest of weeks. My doctor helped me through the worst days saying that the medication was like ‘a life jacket keeping you afloat until the sea grew calmer.’ ‘You will get better,’ she said. I wanted to believe her but didn’t at the time. My world as I knew it was crumbling around me and I couldn’t even play with my children. I shut myself in my room, I didn’t want to see anyone. Outside was noisy and scary and my appetite had vanished too. I lost half a stone in weight and thoughts of wanting to die went round and round my head. I told people this, but I don’t think anyone believed me. I eventually left one day, not knowing where I was going, I just drove. Then I got scared in my floods of tears, remembered my children at home with their Dad but without a Mum, and although I didn’t want to feel like this anymore, I didn’t want to die either, so I called the crisis team and an ambulance arrived. It took some months to recover and move on, but I did. It takes time to rebuild your confidence and strength after such a bad experience. I was hoping I had seen the end of my depression, but I hadn’t, and it returned again this winter. Mildly at first but then in January I got bit badly, and I wasn’t prepared for it. I haven’t got time to be ill. I’m too busy. There are too many deadlines and too many people depend on me. I let things slip. I forgot I need to do regular exercise (I haven’t got time I told myself). I didn’t make time for friends (I’ve got to do this essay). I didn’t make time for relaxation (relaxation, what’s that?!)

I had started feeling anxious and tearful but ignored it. I took a herbal remedy and used a light box. I even had some counselling. ‘Relentless self-care’ was the message I ignored. It obviously wasn’t enough. Last week I broke down crying in work, over nothing really, an email. I locked myself in the toilet and shook. I couldn’t stop crying. I went home and felt exhausted and faint. And cried some more. I had blood tests as I was convinced I had anaemia. The results came back normal. I should have been happy but I was disappointed. I had pinned my hopes on it being a physical illness, one that could be remedied by taking iron or vitamin supplements. Instead I am stuck with the knowledge that it’s because of my mental health and I know I’ve got a lot of work to do to get better. I have started on a different antidepressant. I’m gradually increasing the dosage to reduce the side effects but it won’t start to work for a few weeks. My friends are being supportive and when I’m with them, or my children, I don’t feel too bad, almost normal. But when I’m on my own the dark thoughts come back again and the fog of sadness and despair that saps me of energy and motivation. It’s glorious sunshine outside but I’m sat inside my dark house trying to have a battle in my head about going out for a walk because it’s good for me. I’ve eaten a walnut whip for my lunch but can’t be bothered to make anything proper, even though I know it would be good for me. When I was well, and busy, I’d give anything for whole days to fill with fun things. Now I’m signed off work as I can’t concentrate and I find it hard to do the everyday tasks like keeping the house tidy and cooking proper meals. I keep a brave face most of the time for my children, trying hard not to scar them with my illness, already convinced I have damaged them with my depression in their infancy. 

I think I have started to accept this as a disability that will bite me at times in my life if I do not take really good care of myself. And that I will need help at times to get through it. But I hope I don’t lose more people I love because of it, and that it doesn’t take away my dreams for the future or job aspirations. Ironically (or perhaps not) I am training to be a CBT therapist. I am hoping that my personal experience will help others gain control of their depression. That their black dogs can be trained so that they can still have fulfilling lives. So that they can be happy… As that’s what we all want really, isn’t it?

Depression... it just eats you up from the inside out. It’s like a monster inside your head that takes over. The worst thing is to know that my family and friends were doing all they could yet I still felt so lonely. Anything that was said to me, I managed to turn into a bad thing. I was literally my own worst enemy. I would come home and feel so exhausted from all of the voices in my head that I would just sleep to block it all out. I didn’t want to wake up because living was a nightmare. I felt sick with the fear of night time because that’s when the voices got even louder. I would get so frustrated because it seemed impossible to sleep, as if insomnia and depression go hand in hand. I knew I needed help but asking for it just made me feel like a burden. I wanted to be free of meds, doctors, counsellors, hospitals and negative thoughts. I felt as if I had lost myself and wouldn’t ever be the same again. I had no motivation to do anything because I couldn't see a future for myself. Anxiety caused me to believe everyone was faking their love for me. ‘Cheer up’ was the worst thing anyone said to me. Those two words triggered thousands of horrible thoughts and I was beating myself up for not hiding how I felt well enough from everyone around me. I wanted everyone to know how I felt but I didn’t dare tell them. Eventually I just isolated myself in my room because no contact with people meant nothing could go wrong, surely?

At the moment I rely on medication and I am grateful to have it because I know it has really helped me. At the same time, I balance the wish that I could be free of it with the fear that it might lead to a relapse. The scariest thing about my whole recovery process is that the only person who can truly help me is me. I have learnt to change my thought processes and stop bullying myself, it's a habit that's been hard to break but I know I've made some positive changes. 2013 was a rollercoaster ride and admittedly one with more lows than highs. I feel I have been to hell and back but would I change what I have been through? If I was to be totally honest I don’t think I would. That doesn’t mean that depression is a good thing because it definitely isn’t, but I believe you must turn your negative experiences into positive ones if you can. If I hadn't been through these things I wouldn’t have learnt that the most important thing in life is to be happy. I have now received all of my university offers to study football business and I can now see a future. I hope to build a career in something that I love, something that will make ME happy, not focusing on what others want from me. If I was to give one piece of advice to others who are struggling, it would be not to suffer in silence. There are people out there who have been through everything that you are experiencing and have come out on the other side. In fact, their experiences have made them who they are today. It may seem impossible to overcome but believe me, you will get there.

You shouldn't feel guilty for feeling the way you do because depression is an illness like any other, it isn’t any more self centred than having a broken leg. I was always told to show myself the same respect and concern that I would show for others. We are so accepting of other parts of our bodies breaking, why can't we be that way about our minds too? 

So, on Monday I drove to the big smoke to appear in some videos for Mind. One on depression and one on low self-esteem.  I was really quite excited about the prospect of taking part, and up until I actually sat down with the other participants, hadn’t really contemplated that I may in fact be revealing my innermost thoughts on camera, with a group of strangers, for anyone to see! The lovely Mind people, and production team, gave us some pointers on the general topic areas they wanted to cover, but it was pretty much a free-for-all on what we talked about.  It took a few minutes for us to really get started, but it wasn’t long before we were in full flow, and chatting away to each other as if we’d all met before.  We discussed so many aspects of depression and low self-esteem, from our own experiences, feelings, and treatments, to the stigma still out there in the wider world.  Had it not been for the appearance of lunch we probably could have carried on all day! What struck me about our session was that despite us all having very different experiences, there were several elements of common ground in our experiences.  I felt this really bonded us, and we quickly established a shared set of thoughts and feelings about our problems, and how we tackle them.

I have found since being diagnosed with depression, that sometimes the smallest (almost throwaway) comment from a friend can have a huge impact and be massively helpful – sometimes one sentence can make something click in your head and help you through your journey.  My hope in being involved with projects such as making the information videos is that someone somewhere them may take something away from it and that something may help them to understand their situation, or help them to deal with what is happening to them. Going through the process of filming was almost like an informal therapy session – only we were each other’s therapists, and therapists that knew what our patients really meant, because we could identify with each other so strongly.  The following day I must admit to feeling drained, mentally and physically.  But in a good way – I felt as if I’d taken my brain to the gym and had a really good work out! As much as I can’t wait to share our films around, I’m dreading seeing and hearing myself on film – watching myself is such an abstract thing.  I hate hearing my own voice, so maybe I’ll hit mute when I watch… All in all I got a huge amount from the day and I hope that I’ve been able to contribute in some small part to the wonderful work the Mind already do.

For me, some good has come from having depression. I’m more compassionate, more motivated, and I know more about how my brain works. I try to understand other people better: that blunt colleague probably doesn’t dislike me but is just having a bad day. But despite these benefits, having depression wasn’t exactly a walk in the park. Awareness of mental health problems is rising, realising that depression isn’t the emotion of sadness and an anxiety disorder isn’t the same as feeling anxious. For me, depression feels like the day before you get a horrible cold: you’re not sneezing and don’t look ill yet, but you feel like you can’t think and that all your five senses are smothered in cotton wool. Turning the wrong way out of the lift or spelling your own name wrong feels like the worst thing you’ve ever done. Depression can cause you to feel very sad, hopeless or guilty, have no interest in anything, and find it difficult to make decisions.

I was lucky to access prompt treatment for my depression, which made a huge difference. Treatment can be a combination of medication, formal therapy and other therapeutic techniques such as mindfulness; increased activity and exercise; and changes in diet. Treatment, at whatever stage, doesn’t always mean a cure. Some mental health problems can only be managed, and living with a mental health problem doesn’t have to mean an effect on performance at work. But to get that help, I had to acknowledge the problem and admit that something was wrong. Misconceptions can paint people with mental health problems as weak, unable to cope with stress, and incapable of further responsibility. These can be really damaging as no one wants to fit this description. So they force themselves to carry on as normal, often causing a downward spiral. Deloitte colleagues I’ve told about my own experiences have been beneficial, but there is still more to be done. Depression often shows itself in the workplace, so it’s here that we need to educate individuals and managers to recognise the signs of mental health problems and know how to help.

In June 2013, Mind was selected by Deloitte staff as one of three national charity partners for the next three years. Mind, together with Rethink Mental Illness, led the Time to Change campaign during this time. Time to Change was England’s biggest programme to challenge mental health stigma and discrimination (it is sadly now defunct, as of 31st March 2021). I was genuinely delighted that David Sproul, Senior Partner and Chief Executive at Deloitte, signed the Time to Change pledge. The pledge aimed to improve people’s knowledge, attitudes and behaviour around mental health. It was a public statement of Deloitte’s aspiration to tackle stigma and discrimination in the workplace. I was and continue to be proud to be working for a firm helping break the silence surrounding mental health.

I joined the ecotherapy group at Idle Valley Ecominds in November 2010 following a three month hospital admission. I attended weekly, with support from my mental health worker. Having just launched in September, Idle Valley was still in its very early stages of development, so I was lucky to see the project unfold and grow. I’m an ex-serviceman and suffer from post-traumatic stress disorder and depression as a result of what I witnessed in the former Yugoslavia when I was there as part of the United Nations Protection Force in the 1990s. Since completing active service in 1999 I've received no support from the army; I was told “here are your discharge papers, see you later”. I was fine until about four years ago, when everything came to a boil. I ended up having a breakdown and found myself in a mental health ward. I lost my home because I couldn’t pay the rent, and I lost my job due to injury. I had nothing.

I found out about the Idle Valley group through my community psychiatric nurse (CPN). She told me that it was a local nature reserve that supported people with mental health problems by getting them involved in nature-based projects on the reserve. I didn’t even know there was a nature reserve where I lived, and I certainly didn’t think that nature could help me in my situation, but I tried it. Now, looking back, if I hadn’t taken that chance, I definitely wouldn’t be here now. I really got interested in woodworking and conservation – an interest that was nurtured and encouraged by the staff and other volunteers. I was supported to identify areas of interest and skill - and how I could contribute to the project and then set some goals to work towards. I was given the opportunity to work alongside a more confident volunteer who was interested in similar activities, which gave me support and encouragement. My confidence has grown steadily over the years. Gradually I’ve needed less support; I’ve become more involved in the management of the group and I now sit on the Ecominds advisory group and steering group. I didn’t need as much support from my mental health worker, so I started coming directly to the project on my own. I became more interested in the wider activities of Nottinghamshire Wildlife Trust who run the project and joined a mainstream volunteer group as well as continuing to come to the Ecominds group.

During a review my aims and goals, which is carried out every 3 to 6 months, I mentioned my interest in green woodworking. As a result, together with another volunteer, I attended a course to learn some skills which I passed on to others through workshops. This really boosted my confidence; I’ve done many demonstrations and workshops at open days and events at Idle Valley and it’s given me the confidence to start leading small groups of volunteers in woodworking tasks. The difference Ecominds has made to my life is amazing. After a year my CPN started reducing her visits from every week to every two weeks, and then monthly. My meds have been reduced too – my Citalopram was reduced from 60mg to 50mg. And even better - after a year and a half I was discharged by my CPN. Ecotherapy may not be everyone's cup of tea - but I’d encourage anyone with a similar problem to give it try. I was sceptical at first, but I haven’t looked back since.

I was diagnosed with depression at the age of 19 and have constantly battled with trying to be "normal" and having my black periods. I've been at crisis point three times over the years, but as I've grown older I came to realise that thoughts of taking my own life were not the answer. In some ways that makes it harder, but instead I just keep moving around, or running away as my family see it. One of the hardest things for people to understand is that I've always been able to either maintain or gain a decent job, and many think if I can hold down a good job then things can't be that bad, can they? I tend to go through cycles, I get really down, unable to function and go to work, sometimes unable to even get out of bed or shower for days on end. I then seek treatment, get a bit better, then throw myself back into "normality".  Yet I still keep going round and round in circles, it's like a never ending merry go round without the merry bit.

I functioned by constantly striving to achieve more, be better, earn more. Status and material things became everything to me, but no matter what I did and how hard I worked, in my eyes I was always a failure. Getting a promotion was not a time to be pleased with myself, it was always a case of wh\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\y did it take me so long, or that I only got it because they felt sorry for me. Yet even though I have what society would deem a decent career with a good wage and all the nice things in life, I'm still so immensely unhappy and still have no real friends (apart from one, but even we are growing apart). Following my most recent collapse in "normal" existence I did something that I have always wanted to do but never did because I worried to much about what others would think of me, I threw my tent, bike and some clothes in the back of my car and set off without my phone (accidentally) and went on an adventure.  My goodness I have never felt so me! Don't get me wrong, it wasn't all an easy realisation time. As I moved house almost a year ago I decided to travel around the Western Isles near me. The first night was really exhilarating, the second was a bit more subdued and by the third night I was beginning to wonder what I was doing. It was then that I heard about a small music festival going on and again I did something I would never do and volunteered to work there. Being there, it felt like once I let go of me, I became me.

The biggest lesson I learnt whilst away was that all the dreams and ambitions I have strived for over the years are all the things that I believed I should be striving for and not what I wanted to strive for. I soon realised the reason I go round and round in circles is because I keep aiming for the dreams I think I should be aiming for and not the dreams that are in my heart! Since returning home, I've started to sell all the material things that I just don't care about, don't use and certainly don't need. The real me doesn't care about where I should be career wise for my age, I care about whether I can go climbing if the weather is right or get out on the water, who cares what job I do as long as I'm paying my own bills, if I'm happy then who cares! I think I'll always struggle with depression, but I feel if I break this cycle of going after dreams that are not really mine then who knows, maybe I'll be happier more of the time. And even if I'm not, at least I'll be able to say I'm following my heart and dreams and not those that I imagine I should be doing. I have no idea what the future holds for me, other than that I’m changing merry go rounds for one that looks much more like mine!

I can’t give the advice the government would want me to give. That’s for sure because I, it’s a big part of my world is having a drink and using it to unwind. I don’t think there is anything wrong with it. And I don’t like the growing pressure that is on people for it and the guilt. But I would say, Just know when you’ve hit your limit. But my biggest trouble when I was younger was that I would drink until I got ill and that has an adverse effect on everything. Education when you don’t go in, work when they have to send you home and that’s happened to me several times. And it’s, it’s not good and it doesn’t feel good and you say every time, the cliché that you won’t do it again but you do. And I would just say, just know your limit and try not to mix your drinks too heavily. And they say have a pint of water in between each drink. Apparently that’s a good idea but I’ve never tried it.

I don't think that there is a mental health condition called Depression Verbal Diarrhoea (though DVD does sound familiar...) but if it does exist, then I have it. I've gone from keeping completely schtum about my depression, to telling everyone that will listen. Sometimes even those that won't. I used to feel embarrassed and ashamed, hence the secrecy. Then on the spur of the moment...by that I obviously mean after agonising over it for a few months, I decided to 'come out' by writing a blog about my mental health issues. I put my first post online and added the link to my Facebook page. I immediately felt sick. What on earth had I done that for? I needn't have worried. The feedback was amazing. People told me that I'm brave. A lot said they were surprised cause I don't seem depressed. Some shared their stories with me and others even thanked me for starting the blog and helping to try and end the stigma. I felt like a depression blogging rockstar!

But more importantly, I didn't get a single negative response. Not one. People can be great can’t they? Especially when you need them to be. Which is why I wholeheartedly recommend sharing your problems and giving others the opportunity to support you. Easier said than done though. Talking about it is the best option but where to even start? “Did you watch X Factor last night and have I mentioned I’m depressed?”

I will fully admit now before I write this that I am not quite sure where this piece of writing will go. I have just completed my first session of karate for two months and my mind is unravelling and doing silly things but I'd still like to share this with you. Never in my wildest dreams would I have ever thought as a kid that I would have depression and battle it for a number of years, it is pretty rubbish I can tell you that. Looking back I have probably had it for the last 10 years or so, but I had no idea what mental health was or how it could affect my life back then. I just thought the constant battles with my mind were normal and I was just weak and pretty much not good enough, so I battled on and on and on until I snapped.

It literally took two mini breakdowns for me to realise that I needed to talk to someone. In the end when I look back it all stems from me being a victim of some heavy bullying at school as well as my parents divorce and the break up of what was a sturdy family unit.  Being told you were crap and rubbish (that is putting it mildly) and then beaten up for 5 years at school was not good. The problem was I had no idea I was cracking up, not a clue. I am currently sitting here in my room with my karate gear still on, trying to think of a way to describe depression or tell you what it is. The thing is, I can’t, it is all in the mind and it is different for everyone. All I can really talk about is my experiences and myself.

You know I am struggling to hold everything in at the moment as I am a little fed up of the battle and the strength needed to battle this illness, it is so, so tiring to battle your negative thoughts every single day. With me, it just takes my identity away once it is triggered, Stephen the person is gone and what’s left is this anxious, mumbling, nervous, paranoid wreck who think he is not good enough for anyone or anything and who has no motivation for anything. I hate it, I really do, it has wrecked large parts of my life and a lot of the time it has only been my sheer stubbornness that has got me through.

I am pretty much in pieces at the moment, as I just know how much it wrecks me and takes away who I am. That is what it does! It takes away my identity! Imagine knowing who you are but not being that person because your mind will not let you, that is what it is for me…it affects me in so many ways, and even now, two years after I finally realised that I needed help, I am still discovering what depression means for me. I am still discovering about how it is triggered, how my view of the world is not quite correct and how my passion and desire for the natural world just disappears into a black hole with the words “you are not good enough to do this”.  That really upsets me, as the environment is my greatest passion and I am determined to change the world, the problem is that my mind at the moment is not playing ball. The last couple of years have been one hell of a battle and I have needed my friends and family to help me, especially my youngest sister, even though I would never admit it.

I have had the CBT, the one-on-one counselling sessions and the drugs, it has been one hell of a long haul, but I refuse to give up because I know one day that I might actually be happy with me. The hardest step is to admit things are wrong, after I admitted this I felt as if a huge weight came off my shoulders. I am very open about my depression, which helps me as it makes me feel more normal. The main thing is depression is far from being rare, many, many people suffer in silence. You are definitely not alone.

I had always wondered why I felt so different. Asking myself “why?” for the past 4 years had I often had feelings of sadness, loneliness and despair. At the age of thirteen I initially put this down to hormones, homework and the odd fallout with friends (or boyfriends!). I had a normal life, nothing major had ever happened to me, so I convinced myself these feelings would pass. Three years later they hadn’t. Don’t get me wrong I had happy times but I couldn’t get rid of these hours, days, and weeks of what felt like sinking into a big dark hole that I couldn’t climb out of. I found it too difficult to speak to anyone, even my family, about how I was feeling. I was too scared they wouldn’t understand and I didn’t want them to feel like they had done something wrong.

Once I was 20 I visited my local GP to discuss my worries. I had done some research on the Internet including looking on the Mind website and had looked into depression. I talked to my GP about this. My GP rushed me through this assessment and I answered some questions about my feelings. I didn’t know why I was being asked this and even under exaggerated some of them for fear they were going to label me. I had come across some really unhelpful things on the Internet and even tried to diagnose myself, which just shows how important it is to seek professional support with mental health issues. Apparently I scored quite highly on the questions (which turned out to be the GAD/PHQ scale for anxiety and depression). They gave me no medication and told me to get counselling. Counselling? I asked, how will that help!?

I felt rushed through this process and came out feeling worse than ever. After another few weeks I decided that maybe my GP could be right. I got in touch with my local Mindand attended and induction where another four women were as well. I sat talking to them before the worker came in and this did more good than I ever expected. I learnt that it wasn’t just me this was happening to, it happened to other people too. I wasn’t as ‘different’ as I thought. Unfortunately, this was the last time I went back to this group. I didn’t have the confidence to attend again and work commitments took over, but it gave me the confidence and self-belief to keep on trying to make some improvements to my mental health. Since then, I have been in touch with my local Mind again and re-visited my GP. This time, I felt more confident to ask questions and they ended up putting me on anti-depressants. I also attended counselling, CBT and have started meditation. I have used the Mind website to learn more about depression and anxiety (which I was later diagnosed with). This has really helped me understand the biology behind it but also to normalise my diagnosis. What also helped was talking to other people and Mind helped me to do this. I used MoodGym online to do some online CBT work which went hand in hand with the counselling and helped me to develop strategies when my mood was low or my anxiety became difficult to manage.

Don’t get me wrong, there are still ups and downs. But developing a strong support network of people around me has enabled me to live a ‘normal’ life again. No longer feeling stuck in a rut, alone and isolated. I couldn’t have done this without the support and belief from friends, family and the professionals I was in touch with. The best lesson I learnt was to ask questions, don’t be afraid. Don’t let anyone rush you through assessments or give you one option if you feel that something else may work for you. You know you best! Share everything and don’t under-exaggerate or over exaggerate - this will not help you recover. There is a hope and chance for everyone and although being diagnosed can feel like a stigma or label it is a step forward to living a full and positive life!

I still remember the day when my obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) presented itself in its full form, unadulterated and unapologetic. Although I had been having intrusive thoughts about my sexuality and sexual assault until then, I had managed them on my own. But now they were overwhelming. I couldn't take it anymore. I ran home calling my friends, telling them I was suicidal. But ultimately I wanted to live. For the next couple of days I searched the internet for something or somebody that could help me. My last ditch attempt was on Instagram where I found a wonderful therapist who specialised in anxiety. I begged her for help. She immediately called me, and we spoke.

Therapy began the proceeding Monday. It took months to get to where I am. The therapist saved me, and I am here now telling my story in the hope that helps you. The mind is a powerful weapon that can liberate us or oppress us. OCD is an anxiety-based disorder where the individual has obsessive, repetitive and unwanted intrusive thoughts. To prevent anxiety, the individual will perform compulsions (behaviours) to try to alleviate the anxiety.

Everyone has intrusive thoughts – they often pop into your mind and then disappear. But in the minds of those of us with OCD, they ruminate endlessly and, as a result, we believe it says something about who we are. I live with Sexual Orientation OCD and Harm OCD. Sexual orientation OCD refers to questions surrounding your sexuality. Harm OCD is the fear of hurting yourself and others. Both forms of OCD caused me distress because they collapsed my sense of identity. I felt like I did not know who I was anymore.

At times my mind still tries to oppress me, but I work hard to liberate it through daily maintenance. I do this via gratitude journaling, which allows me to recognise the beautiful things in my life, ensuring I see an abundance rather than a scarcity. Alongside this, I journal to allow myself to see myself for what I am and not as a product of my thoughts. Countless people with OCD hide their symptoms because of the nature of their thoughts. On average, it takes an individual up to an agonising 12 years to get treatment for their OCD. You do not need to suffer in silence.

Through modelling, influencing and public speaking, I am trying to inform people what OCD is and how we can change the stigma surrounding it. I am aiming to deliver my third TEDx talk on OCD, as it remains an extremely underfunded and under-researched mental illness. With the right therapy for OCD, you can get better. I had something called CBT ERP (Cognitive Behavioural Therapy and Exposure & Response Prevention Therapy). ERP exposes you to your very worst fears and learn to not perform the compulsions. By doing this, you sit with the intense and, at times, crippling anxiety until it reduces. I now work as a volunteer advocate with Orchard OCD. A UK-based charity funding faster and better treatment for those with OCD. Through the brain's ability to learn new habits we can liberate the brain. And this has aided me on my road to recovery.

It is estimated that Obsessive Compulsive Disorder occurs in around 1.1% of the general population of the UK. Yet my whole childhood and adolescent life, I never crossed paths with anyone who had the same diagnosis. My relationship with OCD has been ever-changing. It has challenged me, hindered me, isolated me, hurt me and hurt my loved ones. It has also driven me to be more resilient. I have had almost two decades to learn and adapt to my diagnosis. I know stress is my trigger and I know how dangerously easily I can get stressed. From little things like breakfast to bigger things like weekends away, there are a million thoughts and factors to stress about. It is a frustrating cycle which ultimately means I can get stressed about getting stressed.

As a teenager I grew up in a rural area and apart from the local GP there were no resources available to gain a better understanding of what was happening to me. With our slow-speed dial-up Internet, it wasn't like I could go online and find support or information there. I didn't understand why I was obsessing over certain things or why such distressing thoughts kept entering my mind. I couldn't make sense of it to myself so there was no way I could explain it to anyone else. The fear of judgement, being misunderstood or isolated further was too much. So, I powered on, or at least I tried. Despite my school attendance plummeting from the very time-consuming morning routines, I managed to get the grades I needed for further education. In 2008, I moved to Edinburgh, and I have lived in the city ever since. Living in the city independently away from my support network of family and friends was difficult at first, but I soon learned to distract myself. With a busy work schedule and constant social life, I never had much alone time and the noise made it easier to keep everything that was going on in my head, in my head.

But after a while it was as if I ran out of storage space, I began to switch off. I didn't show up to work, I was becoming unreliable with my friends, I racked up thousands of pounds worth of debt on store cards from impulsive buying and my physical health and wellbeing took a hit as I had to choose between paying rent or having dinner. As my day-to-day life began to crumble, I realised my methods of coping had collapsed, and I needed help. The first time I went to an OCD support group, I paced back and forth outside until I gathered the courage to walk through the door. I had no idea what to expect, and that "fear of the unknown" was beyond nerve-racking. The only reference I had for framing my concept of what was about to happen were the depictions of Alcoholics Anonymous meetings in the movies. The expectation of everyone saying hello in sync before sharing their personal story was high so I walked in with my speech prepared, ready to introduce me and my OCD to a room full of strangers.

What waited for me in that room was a pleasant surprise. Bar the fact that we sat in a circle, drinking cheap coffee and listening intently to each other one-by-one, it was not like the movies. The room wasn’t depressing but comforting. I sat there in a room full of strangers who somehow instantly knew me and understood me more than my friends and family had ever been able to. What was irrational and nonsensical in the outside world was rational and relatable inside this room. I did not need to justify my actions or explain my train of thought. These strangers spoke my language, and for the first time I was truly understood. There is an immense power in that. I left that first night of peer support feeling positive. I had spoken to people who were struggling severely and fighting for each day and others who were there to provide support and hope that it could get better. That mix of stages, realising I was somewhere in the middle, was immeasurably comforting.

Years later, I still use a support group. I am not there every month, but just knowing it is there does make all the difference. Once a month there are two events: a formal support group meeting and an activity, like the cinema or coffee. We also have a Facebook group. At the touch of a button, I can contact a group of people who speak the same complex language and they can instantly provide a feeling of comfort, understanding and support. Peer support has played a crucial part in understanding both myself and my diagnosis. Learning from others is important. It is not a competition of “who has the worst situation”, but more a case of sharing common ground and the best methods to handle our circumstances and to develop our resilience. Even if you feel like your own life is a mess, you can help someone by just talking and listening to them. Supporting someone through their struggle can be a challenge, but it can also make you feel stronger and more accomplished. Everyone can benefit from peer support. That first time you attend may give you feelings of fear and anxiety, but push through it. Utilise the resources and materials online, find your community. Hearing from others and realising that you aren’t so different can bring relief and can allow you to express yourself freely without fear of being misunderstood. You can just be you. It has helped me function, it has helped me grow in confidence and it has introduced me to some amazing and kind people. I am so glad that I acknowledged the fact I needed help and attended a support group. I highly recommend gathering the courage to walk through the door.

Welcome to the new roaring 20s, the decade where I imagined I would be out at festivals, around friends, meeting up for family gatherings and in all making memories. The start of this decade for me has been roaring all right, and has given me my memories, but not quite in the way, I’d hoped. The misconception about obsessive compulsive disorder can sometimes leave me feeling preposterous and as if I’m overreacting. My obsessive compulsive disorder started off when I was a child — little things that nobody really picked up on and brushed away as just childhood habits.

Unfortunately, the pandemic couldn’t have escalated my OCD more. My day-to-day life feels swallowed by my OCD. I am washing my hands excessively, cleaning my teeth excessively to the point where I am causing myself harm. I can’t even touch my bed until I have bleached every surface in my room, then washed my hands many times. We all know what we’re meant to do in this global pandemic — wash your hands, stay indoors, wear gloves, clean everything. It’s constantly on the TV, on social media, in magazines, newspapers and any other place you could imagine, the government constantly drilling into us; wash your hands, wash your hands, wash your hands. You could say I was built for this pandemic, always washing and bleaching things. But after never being able to escape the instruction, my OCD took over and became stronger than even I thought possible. The monster I’ve been learning to fight suddenly multiplied. Normally I buy multiple bottles of soap. But when I got to the shop this time there were hardly any left so I grabbed what I could – four. A middle-age woman shouted at me for being selfish, for stockpiling, and she said that I didn’t need that many. Dead right I didn’t need that many — I needed more.

New compulsions arose, I started switching the light switches on and off obsessively, and cleaning the door handles several times a day . I entered my bedroom not using my hands. Elbows are more useful l than we think. I couldn’t sleep properly. I’d get up time and again through the night. When I do manage to get back to bed and fall asleep, the night terrors took over. I dreamt that people I love will leave me, either through choice or illness or an attack, and that it would be my fault because I wasn’t following the rules properly.

For now I need to accept that these new compulsions are here whether I like them or not, and that I have no reason to be embarrassed of them. I keep seeing everybody talking about how we need to use this time to be productive, take up a new skill. No. Just getting out of bed and having a cup of tea is enough. Battling with your head every second is hard enough without feeling remorse because you’re “not using this time effectively”. Taking a breath is using time effectively. That being said, I’m trying to make sure this quarantine isn’t completely doom and gloom. When times are so heavy, blasting music so you can sing as loud as possible, screaming as loud as you can until you’re breathless from that and the dancing, catching your breath back and smiling, are all signs that you’re still living. Putting some trashy reality TV show on or your favourite series so you can laugh is another sign. When everybody speaks about mental health they say having someone to talk to is so important, and I never used to believe them until a couple of months ago. I’m lucky to have the most supportive friends, one of which after meeting me decided to read up on OCD to try and help me feel more comfortable and so she could understand when I was struggling. My parents and grandmother are also incredible, not pressuring me into trying harder at things that I can’t face, not complaining about the excessive amounts of cleaning products and soap we go through, helping me to laugh about my OCD because sometimes if you don’t laugh, you’ll cry and might never stop.

Although you think you are grown up if you just gave it that little bit longer you might realise that certain things aren’t a good idea and, you know, the main thing, just to have aspirations, you know, you’ve got your whole life ahead of you, your whole future and no-one gives you a future and says, You are going to be a doctor and here you go now you are one You know, it is, it is very much about you, people work to get to where they get to and people’s lives go the way that their, they go from the situation you are in and the situation you want to choose to put yourself in, or if you haven’t chose to put yourself in the situation somebody else has put you in, you know? And always sort of fight for what is right as well, by that I mean, like don’t let anyone put you down, especially men because, young mums can do extremely well, very well in fact and it doesn’t, it is not a stereotype, it doesn’t have to go a certain way. I think as long as you hold on to that and have aspirations for the future.

I’m struggling to see the light at the end of the tunnel, I find myself lusting over my old compulsions and routines as they felt so much easier, so much lighter. But even though the world feels like It’s ending, there will be better days... and I’ll be so proud that I continued recovering to enjoy them.

Let me introduce Eddy. I have known him all my life. We have been through some good times and we have been through some bad times. When I was very young Eddy pushed me down the steps, and he tried to set fire to our house. He’s not very good with anxiety and when he is stressed, he takes it out on me. More recently he wanted me to harm my wife and my dog, but more about that later. Eddy has had me on the brink of taking my own life. Why is he still your friend I hear you ask?

Well, Eddy isn’t a friend. He isn’t a family member. Eddy is my OCD. I have named my OCD because I need to talk to him. I am currently suffering my second episode of debilitating OCD in six years, and this time Eddy is angrier than ever. He will put intrusive thoughts in my head, I will carry out my rituals, this will raise my anxiety and remember “Don’t stress out Eddy” and so the wheel keeps turning. One thing I would ask you to take away from reading this is, to me these intrusive thoughts are real. Whilst to a non-sufferer it might seem strange, I will act out the scenarios in my head from start to finish. They scare me so much and I want them to stop. I had CBT (Cognitive behavioural therapy) six years ago and it helped so much. This time there is a ten month waiting list so until I can get the help I so desperately need I will have to do self-help. I am reading a book, Obsessive Compulsive Disorder second edition written by Dr Frederick Toates and his wife Dr Olga Coschug-Toates. Frederick has OCD and he tells you about his life and gives you practical, tried and tested strategies to overcome it.

I am also using Mind to understand what other sufferers are going through. I am very angry about the waiting list and would love to write to Theresa May and complain. I am currently off work and I need to stay away from stressful environments like supermarkets and crowded areas. I am on medication and sleeping tablets so Eddy and I can get a good night’s sleep. I have three contacts on speed dial: a councillor service provided by my wife’s company, the crisis line, and the Samaratan’s text message service. I have cried so much over the past year but none so more than when my wife replied to me when I opened up to her about my intrusive thoughts. I told her I wanted to hurt her and Molly (our dog). She replied “Please if you think you are going to hurt Molly will you leave the house and go for a drive.” Priceless. I love them dearly.

Speaking about my intrusive thoughts to my work's HR department, my GP and my wife was so hard to do because I thought I would be reported. But it's made me feel so much better. I find that the more I tell people the less real it seems. turning. I have been asked a number of times if I would carry out my intrusive thoughts or harm myself and my reply has been no on every occasion. Carrying out my self-help and the medication has strengthened my reasoning. No harm will come to anyone. That’s what I keep telling myself. Oh yes, and of course Eddy.

I have been dealing with Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD) for 17 years, but until recently I’d been totally unaware of what I was dealing with. Only last year I found out that I have been dealing with a form of OCD called ‘intrusive thoughts’. I discovered this through research and reading blogs on the Mind website, and seeing a therapist.

I have been really struggling to come to terms with it, but it’s something I am learning to live with through help and support. I know my OCD will never go away, so I am learning to make it my friend rather than my enemy. As a child you always think you’re going to have this amazing fairy tale life and that you won’t be someone struggling with a mental health problem. I get scared of my own brain - how can something that is a part of you make you feel so rubbish and so scared? Knowing that there is a name for all the suffering and darkness after 16 years of not knowing what I was struggling with makes me feel like I’m not alone and not the only person feeling like this. For so long I thought no one would understand, that everyone would think I was crazy. Only now have I found the strength to talk about OCD so I can help others.

When I was around 13 I remember keeping myself awake at night because of my intrusive thoughts. I would stay up thinking that I was going to end up with a serious mental health problem and be put into a psychiatric hospital. I was so scared of losing control. I would get out of my bed and would just cry and cry in a ball and wouldn’t sleep the whole night, I felt so alone. This carried on for most of my teenage years. I’m not a religious person but I would pray to God that if I got myself christened he would make these horrible thoughts go away. I would then get it into my head that because I never did get christened I was going to be possessed and become evil. I would stop myself from watching the news or certain films because my thoughts would tell me that I was going to carry out the horrible things I saw, or that something bad was going to happen to me.

I used to time myself putting on my clothes, or walking to another room. If I didn’t do it in time I thought something bad was going to happen. I would stop breathing when walking past people so I didn’t breath in their germs. I was always scared about going to new places, or staying at friends houses, or going on holiday, I would get so anxious of the unknown and losing control, or thinking something bad was going to happen to me. When I was 15 I went to counselling, but I was so terrified of opening up that I used to sit in silence until the end of the session. The only person I could talk to was my mum, as she could understand the pain I was going through, but I still thought she was going to send me to a psychiatric hospital.

I have been in some really dark places. I have days where I have intrusive thoughts I can deal with, and I have days where I really struggle. Three months ago I was in a really dark place to the point I couldn’t go into work and felt like I was losing control. The biggest thought that scared me was that I would seriously harm myself or take my own life. Even though I didn’t want to, I felt like I was out of control and that I was just going to do it and from there it spiralled. I made my chin sore by rubbing it too much from anxiety. All I felt were these dark clouds over my head, that I was in a dark hole that I couldn’t get out of. I cried for the whole day, so scared that no one could help me. My boyfriend had to come home from work and we drove to the countryside for a walk to distract me, which helped a little. Sitting on a bench and feeling the warm sun on my face was like sunshine was breaking down the dark clouds. I’m lucky to have such an amazing boyfriend, friends and family who support me, but I knew that I needed to seek help. I needed to open up and not be scared, and be honest about my feelings and thoughts. I firstly went to a homeopath. My first session was very good, but very hard - I had to talk about how I was feeling, my past and fears. I now see my homeopath monthly and also take remedies on a monthly basis which help so much. I religiously have Epsom salt baths 4 days a week which also help to relax.

My homeopath also recommended that I went to see a therapist. I went to the doctor and he referred me to my local therapist through the NHS, who confirmed that I have OCD and that I needed Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT). My first session was challenging because talking about all these thoughts and feelings made them seem more real and I didn’t what to give them recognition, but I learnt from my therapist that it wasn’t recognition that I was giving them, me talking about it was fighting the intrusive thoughts. After my first session, I was still in a low place, but I felt so happy that someone could finally help me and I was excited for the future.

I saw my therapist for around two months and I would have to complete a survey every week. After the two months my ratings from the survey had reduced, indicating that I was getting better, and my therapist felt comfortable that I needed no more therapy. One of the biggest things I fear is that my thoughts are going to come true, but the therapist helped me understand that they’re all ‘just a thought’. I now always try and replace my thoughts with “I’ve just had a thought that…” and it gives it less meaning than if I think, “What if?”. I have also been reading an amazing book which has helped me so much called ‘Overcoming unwanted intrusive thoughts’. It’s a CBT-based guide to getting over frightened, obsessive, or disturbing thoughts. I try and read this book every night. It’s helped me to realise I’m not the only person in the world that has these thoughts and it helps you understand the science behind it.

I still have really bad days to the point where I don’t want to wake up, I can’t be on my own and I’m in that dark hole with dark clouds and I think, “How am I going to get through this? I can’t live my life like this!” But I have to remember I have got through it so many times before, I need to be strong! I also have amazing days where everything is good and I’m super happy. Or days where everything is just right. I feel I’ve always tried to search for happiness, but what is happiness? It’s not a thing you touch, it’s not an object, you have to make your own happiness, even from the smallest things. I’m now trying to come to terms with the fact that this is who I am and my OCD isn’t my enemy, it’s me. I hope that in speaking about my OCD I have helped someone feel like they can open up about how they feel and hopefully recognise they’re not alone.

When I was young I didn’t know what OCD was. I thought it was something I could pray about and ask God to make ‘go away’. I would wish to wake up and not worry anymore, but neither of these were solutions to my mental health condition- Obsessive Compulsive Disorder. Because that is exactly what it is. It’s not a joke, something to aspire to be, or a way to describe an organised friend.

The thing about OCD is that sufferers can have some really intrusive, intense, disturbing thoughts, which are very uncomfortable to say out loud. And because of this we don’t talk about it and it remains misunderstood and people will continue to make the jokes without realising the damage it does. When I was young my intrusive thoughts started quite quiet and tame, for me- they got worse as I got older. I would worry about fires starting, the house flooding or being broken into. This would result in me pushing down on door handles and trying to open (a locked) door, to ensure it was definitely locked. Turning the taps so tight my dad- a 40ish year old man at the time- would struggle to turn it back on. And finally pushing on my closed blind to ensure I could feel the window the other side was shut. After all this before bed at 7 years old, I felt safe. Until the next night when I’d do it all again but for longer as I was feeding my OCD.

From the age of about 9-14 I can’t really remember much about my OCD. I’m not sure if I’ve just repressed those memories, or if it was something I accidentally managed without realising. Around that time I was starting to get into music and playing guitar, so maybe that acted as a slight release for me. It’s hard to know how I coped during that time, and for now thats about all I can say about those years of my life. But luckily for you, I do remember what happened at 15, and that’s when it begins to get especially juicy! Without being overly dramatic being between aged 15-18 were probably the worst years of my life. Year 11 was a struggle to say the least, and I think that’s when I began to crack and became vulnerable to my OCD returning with vengeance. (He had probably missed me). He didn’t just rock up with my 7 year old worries- just like me, he’d also changed. He wanted me to worry about technology, inappropriate photos of myself being taken by accident and shared, or sending offensive, crude emails- as well as fire, floods and burglary. When I was 7 I didn’t really worry I’d send an email to my employer of a picture of my boobs, but thats the important thing to remember about OCD; it changes and develops with us. It’ll always try to capture what we feel most insecure and vulnerable about.

I would spend about 2-4 hours a day checking my phone and laptop. This would entail checking my sent box on email accounts, refreshing social media accounts- and any online account- to make sure my profile picture was what I wanted to be, or that there was no profile picture. I would have to make sure all my apps were closed on my smart phone, the bluetooth was off, and that it was locked before bed. If I wasn’t completely sure of this, I believed my phone could attach or upload photos by it’s own doing.

I remember one Christmas we had all the family around. Everyone was celebrating in the lounge, but me and my OCD were sat in my bedroom having a lot less fun. I kept going back and forth between Christmas and my crisis. I sat on my floor and completed my usual checks. No inappropriate emails sent. No nude photos of me as a profile picture. After half an hour or so I then felt safe and decided to turn my laptop off- but this wasn’t as simple as it sounds. I had to shut my laptop ‘correctly’ and place it down on my shelf ‘correctly’ or again, I believed it would cause the laptop to post all sorts of humiliating things that’d ruin my life. If I wasn’t satisfied I would turn my laptop back on, and start the whole process again. (To anyone with ‘Obsessive Christmas Disorder’ t-shirts or signs, I think now would be the appropriate time to realise your purchase isn’t that humorous nor festive and should probably go!). By the age of 18 I went to college for the first time, to study Music. I felt I had finally started to overcome the trauma secondary school had left me with. And where this is true- socially I felt more confident- my OCD decided it’d sabotage me once again. During the last 2 terms of studying I wasn’t using a computer/laptop, and had a very basic phone (with no camera). This meant I had to handwrite all my coursework and I couldn’t listen to the songs I was meant to be learning on guitar each week, so fell behind dramatically. (I could’ve been headlining Glastonbury this year if it wasn’t for you, OCD!!). It was around this time when I was finally diagnosed and could start accessing help. This didn’t happen instantly, but it was a relief to know why I was behaving like I was, and to have an explanation for my behaviour. I was very vulnerable in general during this period of my life. I remember a lot of tears in the college toilet as I checked my phone’s notifications were clear- which they usually were, no one ever text me!

But joking aside, it is easy for me to forget the extent that OCD impacted all aspects of my life. I didn’t have social media accounts so wasn’t involved in group chats which meant I missed out on lots of social events. I left jobs I enjoyed because of the immense fear of sending crude, racist emails to colleagues. Academically, I disengaged because I needed to use technology to do well, but couldn’t. OCD is still hugely misunderstood, and I don’t think this is always through ignorance but through a genuine lack of information/the portrayal of OCD in the media. Even as a sufferer I still feel like there is so much to learn, as everyones experience is so different. This is why it’s important for me to keep telling my story and opening a dialogue. Although OCD took over most of my teenage years, with therapy and support from my family I have managed to reclaim the ‘now’. There are still days where I struggle. I am constantly aware of my thoughts and it’s something I think about, and will have to live with everyday. But OCD doesn’t stop me from doing anything- I still have the intrusive thoughts, but tell myself if there’s anyone I’d send an inappropriate email to it’d only be to my OCD telling him exactly how I feel- and that would be perfectly okay.

Most people have heard of postnatal depression but no one talks about postnatal anxiety or postnatal obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD). I for one had never heard of these terrifying mental health illnesses. The intrusive thoughts are the worst; it’s like being tortured by your own mind – thoughts so distressing and disturbing they make you believe you are the worst of people - unwanted images in my head of my children coming to harm at the hand of myself and others. Add OCD, depression and anxiety to the intrusive thoughts and you fall so fast you don’t know where to go. My first intrusive thought started when my baby was four weeks old and had a slightly runny nose. From a runny nose, my thoughts quickly spiralled to a chest infection, hospital, intensive care and eventually my baby dying. The anxiety and panic was unbearable. I never slept with worry.

But this was just the beginning. The intrusive thoughts got worse. From bathing my baby to him accidently drowning; from changing his nappy to thinking I would touch him inappropriately. The worst things you could imagine happening to your baby were in my head. For days I couldn’t sleep, I couldn’t eat, I barely functioned. I was so scared of what was going on in my head and scared to tell people in case they thought I was some monster. The problem is once you have those thoughts, you become obsessed with them. Panic sets in because you believe that you’re an awful person for even thinking these thoughts, you become scared thinking that because you had these horrid thoughts you may actually do these terrible things. I was so terrified that I would actually harm my children or something bad would happen to them, I went to live between my mum and mother in law and they took care of my two children whilst I was so unwell. By letting other people care for them, I felt I was protecting them from me. Unfortunately though it meant I distanced myself from my kids. This made me feel so guilty that I couldn’t look after them and I felt I was missing out on my new baby.

I found it so hard to believe that the thoughts were just in my mind and I wasn’t actually going to harm my children. I needed and still do at times, constant reassurance that I was not going to do these disgusting things that kept popping into my head or that it was very unlikely my baby was going to die. I felt so ashamed that I wasn’t managing or happy like other mums seemed to be. I thought my family deserved a better person, a better mum and that I had failed them. I started to have dark thoughts that maybe I needed to be ‘put down’ for having such disgusting thoughts. I felt like I was never going to be normal again and that everyone would hate me. I thought if anyone knew what thoughts were running through my head they wouldn’t want to be anywhere near me and would want me locked up I only managed to calm down by taking diazepam regularly which just made me so sleepy. Eventually I started to Google some of my symptoms and was surprised to find that what was actually happening to me was an illness and I wasn’t the only person to have suffered with it.

I plucked up the courage to go the doctors. Initially I told them I was having really bad general anxiety because I was too scared to say what was happening in my head. After a few days of getting worse and realising what my actual illness was I went back. My mother in law came with me as I was in such a state. Telling my husband, my mum and mother in law was one of the hardest things to do. It was so hard that instead of speaking out loud I showed them the stories and descriptions of the illness I found on Google and said this is what I have. This is where my recovery began. I started on antidepressants. I began to see the perinatal mental health team who have been amazing. They were quick, thorough and have helped me understand my illness better. Regular meetings with the mental health nurse have been an essential part of my treatment and recovery. Being able to talk to a neutral person who understands the illness has helped me get through it.

I also wouldn’t have managed without the amazing people in my life. My husband, Mum and mother in law were my rocks through my toughest and lowest times. I also have three amazing sisters and extended family who all helped out and wonderful friends. Even my best friend far away in Australia helped me in more ways then she’ll ever know. As well as taking medication, I have done a course of CBT. Through the therapy, I realised that I have suffered from OCD for a long time and did not realise that some of my habits’ and ways are actually not ‘normal’. I am still in the early stages of my recovery. But I am finally realising that there is a light at the end of the tunnel and there is hope. To anyone who is suffering with these terrible illnesses, please realise you are not alone, it is an illness, you are not a disgusting person, read other people’s stories (it helped me) and please get help.

I was formally diagnosed with Obsessive Compulsive Disorder in February 2018. I didn’t know I had this illness. It’s been with me for 26 years, and I didn’t see it until I was 25. That’s the thing, many mental disorders are hidden illnesses, hidden even from ourselves. It all seems obvious in hindsight, and what a relief to understand now. I, like many others I’m sure, used to associate OCD with not being able to leave a room unless the light had been switched on and off a certain amount of times. Or repeatedly counting, an aversion to odd numbers, or consistently cleaning your home. While these presentations are true in some cases, they reveal only the latter half of the illness: the compulsions.

Compulsions are the often noticeable behaviours associated with OCD. They are physical or mental acts carried out in an attempt to neutralise “bad” emotions. In this piece, I want to focus mostly on obsessions. The hidden, darker companion to the compulsions. I was completely unaware that I have obsessive thoughts. These thoughts are clever, because the voice they are spoken in sounds like your own; they are convincing, realistic (to you) and almost always very distressing. These thoughts, or my OCD rather, lives somewhere in my brain. Research suggests that both the structure of the brain and communication from neurotransmitters are markedly different in OCD sufferers, however it is not yet fully understood. I can note that my OCD feels very different to my depression, but that is best explored separately.

I grew up with obsessive thoughts, or more aptly, intrusive thoughts. I believed they were a reflection of who I am, but recently I have learned the very opposite. They are exactly who I am not. There is a dark honesty about the next few paragraphs, but I feel it needs to be told. My intrusive thoughts (intrusions) have always been violent. From as young as 4, I remember thinking about death. A little older, about killing, rape, murder. Under the age of 10, I would constantly be haunted by thoughts of torturing people around me. Inappropriate acts of violence. And even though I didn’t understand it, acts of sexual violence. These thoughts came in fast and in succession. They become constant, repulsive, extremely distressing and real. When I was little, I recognised intrusions as bad thoughts. I knew I shouldn’t be having them but I didn’t know how to communicate them to others. They could be so frightening, it almost felt like my own mind was blackmailing me. To make matters worse, obsessive thoughts ugly brother, consequence stepped in. Consequence took my compulsions and mixed them up with my obsessions. It reared its head in the voice that speaks, “If you don’t match all of the spoons up together, your mum will die today”. “If don’t you cross your toes when your legs are crossed, you will crash your car into those school children.” “If you don’t wash your hands 3 times in the 12 step process, your house will be robbed while you are at work”.

Consequence is a master of blackmail. So clever, that I let consequence seep in to my conscious mind and let it tell me that I couldn’t speak to anyone about my thoughts, because if I did, I would act upon them. It convinced me that by hiding them, I was protecting everyone else. It linked my obsessions and compulsions seamlessly, and meant that I mostly hid my compulsions too out of fear that I would be unveiled. So believing my intrusions and consequence, I had these thoughts for over 20 years. However, I grew tired of the distress they caused me in my mid-teens, and I began to accept them. I believed that I was an awful person, capable of violence, rape and murder, and that I was living a double life. That no one knew who I really was. That I was the only person who must think like this. I felt so incredibly lonely. My compulsions may seem strange at times. I have a real issue with the cutlery drawer. I later came to understand this as perfectionism. There were few times where my perfectionism correcting compulsions were apparent to others, and to one person in particular they were very obvious. For me and my best friend in school, they became a game.

On reflection this was an incredibly helpful coping mechanism; by means of distraction, reframing a negative thought as a positive and of course my favourite therapy, laughter. Libby and I sat next to each other in most core lessons, and we knew exactly how to cause trouble for each other. We would come in, sit down and get our books out. I would then line up my pencil case, pen and book with a centimeter between them and the table edge, all equally spaced from each other, ready to do work. The intrusions that led to this, were that I was a failure and that I wouldn’t do well or pass my exams, mild in comparison to a lot, but equally devastating for my self-esteem. A few times, Lib would accidentally knock something out of place and I would carefully put it back and smile. Libby quickly learned that this provoked a reaction and would do it more frequently with more mischief. On multiple occasions, we would laugh as it seemed so ridiculous, but I needed everything to be lined up. Libby’s prime was when she muddled everything up, drew an erratic dot pattern on my work (If you have a friend with OCD, please do not do this!) and I had to leave the class to be sick. I didn’t know at the time, but I was having a panic attack. I have very physical presentations of panic attacks (another time I fainted in Wilkinsons while looking for a planner because none of them had white pages and all had too much writing in them…). They make me feel so horrendous that I used this experience as a catalyst to understand why they were happening and how I could stop them.

So I resumed the game. Aware of the trigger, and solely focused on preventing the awful outcome. I would concentrate on the laughter, Libby’s disappointment when there was no dramatic outcome, and how, physically, it didn’t actually make a difference where the items were placed on the table. I told the voices for the first time to be quiet, and they did. And we laughed. And my work was covered in dots, and lines, unevenly aligned prose and inappropriate doodles, and I didn’t fail. I had my first piece of hard evidence that the thoughts had lied- and I don’t tolerate liars well. All of a sudden, my daily thoughts were manageable. I could shoo away many perfectionism induced intrusions and for a year and a half, my happiness was almost pure. My other OCD trait however, is a little more complex. It transpires that I have an excessive need to please others, and in neglecting this, my brain tortures me with every possible bad outcome - and worse- so that I can’t cause any harm. In a less than endearing way, it is protecting me and making me a better person. Although I would much rather learn this lesson in a different way.

It turns out, that OCD sufferers are the least likely people to actually cause harm to others, as they are so repulsed by their intrusions, that they would never act upon them. This was the line from OCD UK that started my recovery. As it happens, I am not a violent, murderous rapist. They were just intrusive thoughts. I’m also not going to get burgled if I close my blinds. I don’t have to check the conservatory door is locked multiple times. There doesn’t need to be three pieces of cutlery in each section of the dishwasher. My boyfriend isn’t going to leave me if the traffic light turns red. My parents won’t die if I don’t mention them in my thoughts before bed. I won’t jump in front of that bus. I’m not going to stab my brother in his sleep. And I especially don’t want to kick your dog into the river. I actually want to make sure none of these things ever happen. Remember that they are only thoughts until we give them meaning. Don’t give them the pleasure of meaning. Let them pass.

Hi, my name’s Faisal. I’m 24 years’ old. I first started to realise that I had OCD around the age of 19, so it was about five years’ ago now. My first initial experience was quite a daunting one because it just felt like it really from nowhere. It just felt like these thoughts have come all of a sudden and I didn’t know where they had come from. And the nature of the thoughts and the content of the thoughts are totally the opposite of what I would expect my personality to be. Because when thoughts are intrusive when they’re negative they can kind of feel like, does this make me a bad person? Does it make me a horrible person? Does the nature of these thoughts make me vile? When I did feel those thoughts happening they were all kind of feeling like a lonely place. It’s like, I am very isolated.

I couldn’t really ask my family because I didn’t really think they’d understand. For me I was also at university at the time but I didn’t really talk about my experiences to them. I didn’t tell them that I did have a mental health issues but, on reflection now, I kind of think that that was a mistake because at least they would have been able to give me the correct support I needed in terms of my assignment work and in terms of, maybe, granting an extension just to relieve the stress. So I kind of felt like the only way to possibly get it looked into was to go and see a GP.

So I ended up going back for a second opinion where I was actually advised to go to a local mental health clinic. Once I went there, I think it was about two weeks’ later, and I saw another doctor whilst I was there. And whilst I was there we were talking about my experiences, my thoughts, the irrationality of them, what I was going through, what I was thinking, what I was feeling, what I was imagining. And from then on that’s when I initially got diagnosed with OCD. That was kind of like, it felt like a bit of a relief in a sense, because I had an answer and it wasn’t an answer that everyone wants, but I had an answer as to why I was feeling this way. It kind of made a bit of sense in the sense that I could actually now look at trying to tackle it head on and try to overcome it. Then I started to actually go for cognitive behavioural therapy, which is more commonly known as CBT and that was like one of the main courses of treatment for myself. They also gave me Fluoxetene tablets as well to take, which is an anti-depressant.

So I did CBT for, I think it was, 12 weeks. In CBT you have to talk about your experiences. You have to talk about the situations you’ve been in, what you’ve done throughout the week and use examples to try and tackle the thought process try and tackle how you’re thinking and try and change it gradually over time. Initially, I didn’t really understand what I was getting from it.

But I kind of felt that it was necessary because everyone wants to try and get themselves better. They want to try and motivate themselves to feel better. And for me CBT was a kind of around that really. I went through different tasks which made me feel a bit uncomfortable but I kind of think that the more practice you do with them, the more you analyse them, the more you realise that the thoughts are just thoughts and they’re irrational and they’re not real, and they’re not a sense of reality as to how you feel. I kind of felt CBT, from that point of view, was kind of a positive experience. I even felt lots of compassion from my therapist as well. Like she kind of understood what I was going through so having that understanding and having that compassion can be a means of actually making myself feel a bit more comfortable. And it made me a bit more open in terms of talking about how I feel. For me, just having that support and having that feeling that you are cared about is something which is pivotal, and it can be very important in actually trying to make someone’s life a bit more comfortable. One of the actual books that I was encouraged to read by my therapists described in a bit of detail intrusive thoughts, and it gave scenarios of intrusive thoughts as well. For something like that it was a bit of a comfort to me to realise, even though they were just scenarios, it kind of gave me a feeling that real people think like that as well.

I had CBT twice and at the end of it I felt a bit uncomfortable to have to leave it because it can be quite scary to have to feel like you’re going on your own now. It’s your own step, your own road and you’re not going to get as much help and support as you used to. But I kind of felt like, I kind of feel like it does have to happen sometime and you can’t hold on to that support mechanism for ever.

I knew I was going to be honest and I was going to try anything and everything that they were going to give me to as tasks and I did that and now I’m seeing the results. So even though it’s uncomfortable to let go of that support mechanism once CBT had finished, it’s now gradually more comfortable because I kind of feel that I’m not in need of that support anymore. OCD was a bit of a barrier and it kind of stopped me from doing the things which I wanted to do and being the way which I wanted to be really. My OCD at the moment on a day to day basis is generally quite good. I’m a lot happier now than what I was when my OCD initially started.

I’ve been thinking about writing a blog for a while, but I’ve never really known how to write my experiences without feeling like I’ve committed a horrific crime. Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD) has a horrible way of making you feel like that – it can take over every waking thought. The constant fear of me not being able to do anything ‘right’. Imagine the utter horror of taking someone's life. Now, your brain can probably disregard that thought quickly, so you’re not aware of it for long. But imagine having that thought over ten times a day - and not being able to get rid of it. At 15, I started experiencing intrusive thoughts like this. They were quite mild at first - but now I get them frequently. They are my ‘obsessions’ - the more you try to forget what you’re thinking, the more they appear in your mind. Without realising it, I started doing rituals to try to get rid of these thoughts - my ‘compulsions’. I had no awareness of what was going on. I spent years thinking I was some kind of horrific serial killer who just hadn’t been caught by the police yet. But what was actually happening was the symptoms of OCD.

As I got older, I began believing that my family and friends would get harmed if I didn’t do something ‘right’. And I’d also developed a massive issue with food and drink contamination. A childhood fear of rejection, and that fear of contamination, led to me feeling like I had no control over anything in my life. Trying to juggle three ‘A’ Levels with the constant terrors of harming someone and contamination all became too much. I thought being skinnier would solve my all problems and help get back the feeling of control I desperately wanted. In fact it made things a million times worse. I restricted my food intake massively and began exercising at every opportunity. And I started spending less time with the people I liked, because I was scared I would do harm – hurting someone is my worst nightmare, so that’s what my OCD revolved around.

Sixth form became harder as time went on. My compulsions became weirder and more frequent. Trying to write was the absolute worst. I would constantly write and rewrite notes until they looked ‘right’. My various compulsions included avoiding cracks in pavements, repetitively counting tiles, buttons and lines, walking on the side closest to the traffic, checking the news 3 times a day, making sure things are ordered symmetrically on my desk and hand sanitising after touching pretty much anything… By 19 I was, at last, diagnosed with OCD. I can’t begin to tell you how annoying it is to have OCD. Not only do the thoughts constantly cause me a huge amount of anxiety, the compulsions/rituals take up so much time and effort that I sometimes can’t even remember what I was doing.

Anyone who says that having OCD is ‘helpful’ couldn’t be further from the truth. I may spend hours cleaning dishes and making sure my things are organised/symmetrical - but when will any of these compulsions benefit me? NEVER. I do these compulsions because if I don’t, I truly believe my family and or friends will be hurt in some way. But at least OCD is slowly getting the recognition it needs as a serious mental health problem because so many sufferers and celebrities (like Mara Wilson and Rose Dix) have talked openly about their struggles. I think Rose, Mara and Kati Morton's great influence has helped OCD and mental health in general, become less stigmatised now.

When you're growing up,  and learning about the world around you, no matter what background you come from, the last thing you expect to be keeping you up at night is an overwhelming, unexplainable, intangible fear. This seems to be the case for far too many young men and women, but it doesn't have to stay that way for anyone. I was 15 when my Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD) first manifested itself. I've always had quite a fortunate, easy life and I always noticed people around me with less good fortune. A close friend of mine had a mother who was terminally ill, and it was absolutely horrible for them to go through. As is the nature of her diagnosis, there was nothing I or anyone else could do. I really wanted to help. I was very, very worried about my friend, and his family (just for clarification they have coped with it fantastically). I started to pray. This made little sense to me, as I wasn't remotely religious, but it gave me some comfort that I was at least doing something. This was the beginning of the slippery slope. One thing that is very important to mention is that I told my parents I was doing this within the first couple of weeks - I think they knew I wanted to help, and like me, didn't realise quite what I was doing.

Each day, I'd pray, and each day nothing worse happened to my friend's mother. And so a pattern began to develop. I started to pray more and more. Twice, three times a day within a couple of weeks. And it wasn't just about this family anymore, it was about everything that troubled me in the world. Naturally it began locally, people I saw unfairly treated in school, but eventually my capacity to worry led me to worrying about things completely outside of my control. I would pray for all of it, to make sure nothing bad happened. I had also developed other forms of compulsive behaviour. Other rituals. Dozens of them. I'd perform all of these on a daily basis, sometimes hourly, trying to make sure that I was doing everything in the world that I could to help those in a less advantaged position than myself. As if trying to prove my dedication to someone, or something, I made the execution of these rituals and prayers nigh on impossible with criteria and order that had to be executed perfectly. If I failed, I had to start again. Over about six months, the illness began to completely take over my day-to-day functioning. One of the biggest changes for me was a new sense of logic, things which were highly unlikely to happen became definite possibilities if I didn't act out all of my rituals.

My father pointed out to me that I had to think of the illness not as myself, or my own mind - it was a virus. We don't blame ourselves when a virus comes into our body and knocks us down for a few days, we go to the doctors. But when it's in our heads, our most sacred place, we blame ourselves. We end up fighting ourselves, and that's what make mental illnesses so difficult to deal with, the perfect villain. You have to try to separate yourself from the illness. It's not fair to allow it to control you. My parents were invaluably helpful - they tried their best to stop the illness from getting worse, but there was only so much anyone non-professional could do. They advised we try some counselling with the NHS. I flat out refused, I didn't want to publically admit I had a huge problem. But I wasn't getting any better. One day, I prayed, at full concentration for 45 minutes straight. I was exhausted by the end of it. I walked up the stairs to my parents’ room crying and told my mum to book an appointment as soon as possible. As I learned over the next few months, going to the NHS was not public, it was highly discreet. I started a course of Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) with a trainee counsellor, and 17 months after it had all started, four months after I had agreed to go to the NHS, I was free of the automatic negative thoughts, all of the rituals. I have been ever since. I'm now in my second year at University, studying Film and Television Production, and hoping to one day show, through filmmaking, that mental illnesses are beatable, and have to be treated with the same respect and gravitas as physical illnesses.

It is not easy. OCD is the hardest thing I have ever had to deal with. But with the right help, I believe anything is possible. Please don't hesitate to seek help, wherever from. And for those who see others suffering, please try, without forcing, to encourage seeking extra help. The NHS has made such a difference for me and many others I've met. It feels like a huge leap to book that initial GP appointment, and it is, but it's achievable. Seek extra advice. Go to the doctors. Talk it through.

Obsessive-compulsive disorder has had a profound impact on my life, muffling my school grades, discontinuing my social life and even forcing me to drop out of university. So it wouldn’t surprise you to know, hearing throwaway comments like “I’m so OCD” really frustrates me. 

It’s a debilitating illness! So, when I was asked to be interviewed for an episode of Horizon aimed at counteracting the trivialisation of OCD through scientific basis, I jumped at the chance. One of the ways in which my OCD manifests itself is through the fear of being contaminated by germs, where actions such as touching an item belonging to someone else, would lead to obsessive thoughts of myself coming to harm.

So strong was the fear, for a period of time I confined myself within the four walls of my room to avoid any contact with the outside world. And such was the fear of being stigmatised and the trivialisation of OCD it led me to hide my debilitating illness. After years of suffering in secret, it was only when I was at my lowest, having just dropped out of university, did I seek help. Since then, having had a course of Cognitive Behavioral Therapy involving Exposure Response Prevention, I’ve managed to move on with my life.

In fact, I don’t think I would’ve made it to the quaint studio, as the idea of using public transport “rife with the perils of contamination”, would have been too much for me. However, I made it fine and arriving at the station I felt like a celebrity, having been greeted with a taxi, with my name on a board, to transport me to the studio where filming was taking place. At the studio, the lovely Sam and Emma were there to greet me keeping me distracted by engaging me in pleasant conversation until it was my turn to be interviewed. Once it was my turn, Claudia, who had reassured me about the process over the phone and Peter the director explained to me what was going to happen. Whilst this was happening, one of the crew was fitting me with a microphone.

Even if I had gone through the interview, I would have been distracted by the thought of needing to wash urgently – a distraction that I faced when in classes at school and in university lectures. The set had an old industrial vibe and was filled with an array of chairs and retro objects. I was asked to walk around the room interacting with the objects before being asked to pick a chair to sit in. This was once my greatest fear, having to touch objects with no prior knowledge of where they have previously been; I would’ve walked straight out of the room! However, having undertaken Exposure Response Prevention, having previously faced my fears & not performing my compulsions and having realised that I did not come to any harm - I felt comfortable interacting with the objects. The chair I picked was a leather armchair that I could sink into. It was quite low so it made it difficult for Peter, who was interviewing me. He found a solution by pulling up a child’s chair, used in primary schools, opposite to me. It amused me to see such a tall man sit in a chair made for tiny children, but it was another great example of how the team put me at ease. I’ve spoken openly about my OCD before to people who are close to me and to people who are complete strangers, but doing it in front of a camera was surreal. It felt like an out of body experience and I was so aware of what I was saying, how I was saying it and my body language that it made me feel extremely self-conscious, but that feeling never came close to the anxieties that I had faced when my OCD was at its worst.

The day showed me how far I had come over the last 10 years. It was something I could enjoy, having been in the dire situation of not being able to leave my room. "Hopefully the programme will make you think twice before you use throwaway comments like “I’m so OCD”.

Having struggled for over fifty years, it is difficult for me to imagine a life without OCD. In that time I have experienced OCD in all its insidious forms, enduring the agony of 'pointless' obsessive rituals and being driven to distraction by persistent and frightening ruminations. I have also undergone many types of therapy, some yielding little or no benefit, and others which have helped me to escape the strong hold of OCD in order that I might fully engage with life. I recognise more than anybody what an intractable, stubborn and unforgiving affliction OCD can be. Yet, I also know that it is possible to adapt to and live with this condition, and in my case to even turn some of its characteristics to my own advantage. In 2013 I was made redundant from the job I loved, teaching English. Whilst redundancy is traumatic for anyone, being an OCD sufferer I was faced with the unenviable prospect of an enforced period of inactivity, the worst possible scenario for increased OCD activity. I quickly realised that I needed a focus in order to stop myself slipping back down the obsessive slope, but what? It then struck me, that having been an ardent pub quizzer for many years and a fan of TV quizzes, that I might apply for Mastermind. Despite some serious misgivings about whether I would be able to cope with the pressures of an audience and television cameras, I decided to take the plunge and submit an online application.

So, my “Mastermind journey” began with phone and panel auditions. Apparently between two to three thousand people apply for the show annually, so as you might imagine, I was thrilled and excited a few weeks later when I was informed by the producer that he wanted to offer me a place on the show; thrilled and excited yes, but being a veteran OCDer, also worried that under the pressure of the spotlight I might succumb to obsessive thoughts and make a fool of myself on national TV! After spending a couple of months swotting up on my specialist subject, Blackadder, it was time to travel down to Salford to record my heat and I’m sure I don’t need to tell anyone who has struggled with any type of mental health problem how nervous I was beforehand. It certainly helped though that I was warmly greeted by the BBC production staff (although I was far too nervous to accept any of the food provided!); and that my fellow competitors were unstintingly friendly. As I waited anxiously to be called to the chair by host, John Humphreys, I tried to calm myself by concentrating on my breathing and then, suddenly, it was time to take my place in the infamous black chair. 

Thankfully, when the lights went down, the competitive side of my character kicked in and although the show is recorded in front of a large studio audience, it felt as though only Mr Humphreys and myself were present. At the half-way stage I was joint first, but a good general knowledge round meant I had won my heat and was through to the semi-final! In my semi-final I took John Lennon as my specialist subject and despite dropping a couple of clangers, I once again pulled through on the strength of my general knowledge. The final itself was one of the most nerve-wracking experiences of my life. Once again my fellow competitors were friendly people, but I sensed an extra tension within the group, no doubt brought about by being within touching distance of the much-coveted title of Mastermind champion. In the event, the contest was incredibly close-fought. The only tactic I consciously adhered to was to try avoid passing, and this ultimately paid off as I tied with fellow competitor Brian Chesney on twenty five, but sneaked past him courtesy of my one pass to his four. What happened next remains somewhat of a blur, but I do remember experiencing a huge feeling of relief as opposed to any feeling of euphoria. As John Humphreys presented me with the Mastermind trophy, he commented that I had appeared nervous – “if only you knew John” I thought, “if only you knew…”

If someone had told me thirty years ago that one day I would win a national title on TV, I would have laughed at them. At that time my OCD was so severe that I could barely function, let alone conceive of appearing before a television audience of millions! Yet, I am living proof that it is possible to live with OCD and, what’s more, to achieve your ambitions.

Many people are surprised to discover that I have obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD), because I hide it so well. It can often be described as a secretive condition and I’ve concealed my compulsions for a long time. This has been relatively easy to manage as the main manifestation of my OCD is a need for order and symmetry within my own environment: my flat, my car, my desk. I’m not, for example, compelled to line up items on a restaurant table, or straighten tins in a supermarket, where someone else might see. My OCD began while I was living with my now ex-husband. When he was out, I would put things back in what I considered the right place – fortunately, he left for work before me and got home later than I did. I was still, at that time, able to tolerate the ‘mess’ that ensued when he was around, i.e. anything being a fraction of an inch out of place. He has told me subsequently that he wasn’t aware I was doing it. He did once catch a glimpse inside my wardrobe and comment on its tidiness. I shut the doors before he could register the full extent of that tidiness, which included evenly spacing the hangers. My wardrobe was one area of our flat that was completely within my control, so provided an outlet for me to give in fully to my compulsions. I just had to make sure I put my clothes away while he was in another room.

When we split up, I hired a ‘man and van’ to move my belongings and decided to save time by not emptying my chest of drawers, leaving the drawers to be carried out as they were. The removal man noticed the way the contents were laid out. ‘Blimey, what’s the matter with you, love? Were you in the army or something?’ he asked. In the stress of the move, I’d overlooked that the way I did things might draw attention. I felt mortified. In my new flat, I was free to create my own patterns for my possessions, without fear of disruption. I became so obsessed with maintaining the status quo that I couldn’t have anyone in my home and developed strategies for keeping others at bay, such as meeting friends at pubs and restaurants. During that period, I engaged in only a few short-term relationships and steered those partners away, by claiming their home was more spacious or comfortable for us to spend time in. Even when my parents occasionally visited for the day, I struggled. Never mind the fact that I had to move furniture around to accommodate them, they would keep picking things up – like photos – to look at them! And I couldn’t clear up as I went along, as I usually would.

At work I’ve often had my own office, or a desk only overlooked by a few people. Even in an open-plan environment, as I am now, it’s quite easy to re establish order at the end of the day without anyone noticing. I work a compressed week, so usually find myself almost alone by the time I leave. If others are around, I just do things more quickly. Most people are too busy to pay attention to my scrabbling in drawers and tinkering with things on my desk, as I adjust their spacing. These days, I’m open about having OCD, including writing a blog on the subject. Some of my colleagues, as well as friends, have commented that they’ve never observed the compulsions I describe. That doesn’t mean, however, that I would ever want anyone to actually see what I do. It’s one thing writing about ordering your belongings, it’s another having someone watch you do it. I think the anxiety that underlies my OCD would only be exacerbated by enacting my compulsions in front of other people and that anxiety is something I will continue working to manage.

I think if you are going to drink you are going to drink nobody is going to stop you, just be careful, be aware of, the situations you can get yourself in. If you are going to do drugs, I personally think they are silly, because I have learnt from my experiences, but, you are young, you are going to try stuff, just make sure if you are going to be drinking you are with someone responsible, who is someone that is going to look after you, not a bloke. And if you are doing, if you are going to do drugs make sure you are always around, just make sure you have always got someone there, you always someone around that is responsible, someone you can talk to about your experiences, don’t keep things to yourself and do it by yourself because, I think it is a lot more dangerous than what it is.

I think drinking, in the drinking sense it’s caused a lot of issues in my life, like you drinking is going to block out one problem but you can always guarantee it’s going to bring up another problem, you’re going to get drunk and you’re either going to start an argument with somebody, you might fall pregnant, you might, you might lose your friends, do you know what I mean? Or anything could happen to you. So answering one problem with something else is not the answer to, it’s not going to answer another problem if that makes sense?

Just don’t feel pressured into anything. Because I think when you are younger it seems such a big deal and it seems like a really like, Ah people will remember us forever or if I don’t do that or I don’t do this, and I’m so un-cool. And like now you look back and you’re like, No. And I like at the time you’d be just like, Oh stop patronising me. That’s a really patronising thing to say. You don’t know what it’s like, you don’t know what it’s like to be me. And I can totally take that point on but it really doesn’t matter what, like you should only ever do anything that you feel comfortable with and I think like teachers and parents and stuff really need to impart that on their children. That they should only be doing things that they feel comfortable with and that they feel in a safe environment and. And then if they want to talk about things then there are places that they can go and that there should be openness about these things.

Like with alcohol you’ve just got to be careful. I mean nobody is saying, don’t go out and have a good time but just think like what effects it could have on you. A lot of people judge a good night from what they can’t remember and just. Just have a drink but you know but don’t be stupid with it because it will affect you. And drugs, and there’s no way. Just stay away from any drugs because it’s not worth it in the long run to lose everything.

Although you think you are grown up if you just gave it that little bit longer you might realise that certain things aren’t a good idea and, you know, the main thing, just to have aspirations, you know, you’ve got your whole life ahead of you, your whole future and no-one gives you a future and says, You are going to be a doctor and here you go now you are one You know, it is, it is very much about you, people work to get to where they get to and people’s lives go the way that their, they go from the situation you are in and the situation you want to choose to put yourself in, or if you haven’t chose to put yourself in the situation somebody else has put you in, you know? And always sort of fight for what is right as well, by that I mean, like don’t let anyone put you down, especially men because, young mums can do extremely well, very well in fact and it doesn’t, it is not a stereotype, it doesn’t have to go a certain way. I think as long as you hold on to that and have aspirations for the future.

I can’t give the advice the government would want me to give. That’s for sure because I, it’s a big part of my world is having a drink and using it to unwind. I don’t think there is anything wrong with it. And I don’t like the growing pressure that is on people for it and the guilt. But I would say, Just know when you’ve hit your limit. But my biggest trouble when I was younger was that I would drink until I got ill and that has an adverse effect on everything. Education when you don’t go in, work when they have to send you home and that’s happened to me several times. And it’s, it’s not good and it doesn’t feel good and you say every time, the cliché that you won’t do it again but you do. And I would just say, just know your limit and try not to mix your drinks too heavily. And they say have a pint of water in between each drink. Apparently that’s a good idea but I’ve never tried it.